"The 360-foot-tall antenna once stood atop the north tower of the World Trade Center, transmitting signals to televisions across New York City.
It collapsed with the twin towers after the Sept. 11, 2001, attack, and six broadcast engineers lost their lives as they tried to keep connections going.
For more than a decade, the antenna -- actually a rusting, broken, 40,000-pound piece of it -- had been housed in Hangar 17 at Kennedy International Airport, along with more than 2,500 other items collected from the rubble of World Trade Center.
On Tuesday, that remnant, which connected two other parts of the antenna, was among the final three items to leave Hangar 17. The storage room is now empty, its contents nearly all distributed to museums, exhibits, fire stations and other locations across the country and in 10 foreign countries. A few other items, including a police vehicle and damaged railroad tracks, remain outside the hangar.
Hangar 17 will close in the coming weeks and is expected to be demolished, Steve Coleman, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, said.
\"In essence, this hangar collected history,\" Joseph W. Pfeifer, assistant chief for the New York Fire Department, said on Tuesday as officials from the authority, the Fire and Police Departments and the Stephen Siller Tunnel to Towers Foundation gathered for a ceremony for the departure of the final items. \"Each part of those pieces that were collected told a story,\" Mr. Pfeifer said.
Daniel Rodriguez, a former New York police officer known as the \"singing cop,\" belted out \"God Bless America\" as an American flag was laid over the antenna connector on the bed of a semitruck.
The portion of the antenna served as a connector between a hexagon-shaped piece and a triangle-shaped piece, 168-feet up the antenna, when it stood atop the World Trade Center.
Beside the antenna connector, also loaded onto trailers were two of the other items left behind: a 35,000-pound elevator motor from one of the towers, and a 42,000-pound concrete structure from the B2 level parking garage of World Trade Center 6. That structure survived two separate attacks; it was located in a parking garage near the site of the 1993 bombing, Amy Passiak, an archivist in charge of curating the artifacts, said.
The items have been given as a gift to the Tunnel to Towers Foundation for use in one of its exhibits nationwide. The foundation, created to honor Mr. Siller, a firefighter who died on Sept. 11, 2001, will place the artifacts in temporary storage while it finds a permanent museum or other location for an exhibit.
\"It's important for our country not to forget what happened on that day,\" said Frank Siller, Mr. Siller's brother, who is the chief executive of the foundation. \"We owe it to them,\" he added, motioning to the law enforcement officers and firefighters behind him.
In light of recent terror attacks in the world, Mr. Pfeifer said, the steel from the trade center serves as a reminder not only for the victims of Sept. 11, but also for the victims of all acts of terror.
\"These special artifacts provide us hope,\" he added. \"It also represents that on 9/11, not only did we lose almost 3,000 people but in New York, we saved over 20,000.\"
Thomas P. Purtell, chief of citywide operations for the Police Department, choked up as he spoke during the ceremony.
\"Those of us that survived that day,\" Mr. Purtell said, \"we'll never forget.\"
Several people at the ceremony felt the artifacts contained DNA of people who were never found after the attack, \"of all the lost souls,\" said John Hodge, chief operating officer for the foundation.
\"As we watch this truck move with the artifacts,\" Mr. Pfeifer said, \"it carries our stories, our stories of what we did that day.\"
Photograph
A Truck Carried a 40,000-Pound Television Antenna Connector Out of Hangar 17 at Kennedy International Airport On Tuesday. (Photograph by Dave Sanders for the New York Times)
Word count: 689
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 20, 2016"
