"Hollow boasts about the jihadists having been beaten have been exposed. Islamabad must finally remove counter-terrorism from a heavy-handed army, and put the civilian police in charge
The attack by Islamic militants against a university in Pakistan's north-western region not only destroyed lives (at least 30 were killed), but also laid bare the failings of the Pakistani government's counterterrorism strategy. The attackers sought maximum psychological impact by targeting students and university staff -- with many of the victims shot in the head. Nor is it a coincidence that this has happened just one year after 134 children were massacred at a school in Peshawar -- a memory that remains raw. By striking yet again, and just 30 miles away from Peshawar, the Taliban insurgency has demonstrated its capacity to sow death anywhere it pleases. Oft-repeated government claims that the armed jihadist militancy had been broken are left in tatters.
Honesty, in place of denial, is now essential. But what is equally needed, if Pakistan is to find a way out of its predicament, is an urgent reappraisal of its whole security strategy. Handing counterterrorism policies entirely to the army has not worked. It undermines civilian rule and the wider checks and balances that were meant to be created since the return of democracy in 2008. Military force is a blunt tool. The army can bomb, deploy tanks and fire artillery across the north-western tribal areas, but it simply isn't up to the detailed work of dismantling local networks. Regional and local police forces, which are best placed to know what is going on in their own areas, really should be given the job, but they lack the resources and the political backing.
The army regularly announces body counts -- the number of \"militants\" killed -- but it has failed dismally to neutralise the insurgency's command structure. And it has long been suspected of distinguishing between \"bad\" jihadi groups (those attacking security forces) and \"good\" ones (those perceived to promote strategic Pakistani interests, in India and Afghanistan). A more effective strategy would surely rely on empowering law enforcement agencies and civilian institutions.
The political might of the Pakistani military has been familiar ever since independence, and especially the 1971 war with India. The end of the Musharraf era in 2008 was meant to usher in civilian rule and yet the army remains in charge of counterterrorism and pulls a blanket of secrecy over its conduct. Pakistan's international partners should now push for resources to be channelled towards police and civilian structures. A targeted, intelligence-based approach is better than the blunt use of lethal force in populated areas. As the world looks on in shock, the right way to show solidarity with the victims is to demand a more effective -- and less militarised -- response to terrorism.
Credit: Editorial
Word count: 479
(Copyright , Guardian Newspapers Limited, Jan 20, 2016)"
