"PARIS -- It was an ominous discovery, especially for a city so recently scarred by large-scale terrorism: A car full of gas cylinders, parked in the heart of Paris near Notre Dame Cathedral.
It was a puzzling discovery, too, and four days after the car was spotted early on Sunday, the mystery surrounding it still swirls with unanswered questions.
But the biggest one -- Was it connected to a terror plot? -- appeared to have been answered late Thursday night with the arrest of three women.
Bernard Cazeneuve, the French interior minister, announced that the three women were \"in all likelihood preparing new and, moreover, imminent violent actions.\"
Mr. Cazeneuve described the women, ages 19, 23, and 39, as \"radicalized\" and \"fanatics.\" They were arrested on Thursday evening in Boussy-Saint-Antoine, a small town about 14 miles southeast of Paris.
At least one of the women was carrying a knife and wounded a police officer in the shoulder during the arrest, Mr. Cazeneuve said. Other officers opened fire, wounding one of the women. The officer's wound was not life threatening. Officials did not say which of the women was shot, or how seriously she was wounded.
In praising the police, Mr. Cazeneuve called the operation a \"real race against the clock.\"
That race started in the early hours of Sunday when people first noticed a Peugeot 607 sedan parked illegally, with no license plates, in the middle of a small street on the left bank of the Seine, in the Fifth Arrondissement, just across from the Île de la Cité, according to the mayor of the district.
The car was found about a three-minute walk from Notre Dame Cathedral, and also close to Police Headquarters and the city's main courthouse.
One of the women arrested on Thursday is a daughter of the car's owner, according to the Paris prosecutor's office. The owner of the vehicle was arrested on Tuesday, but has since been released.
The car was not rigged to explode. The police found no detonator with the six gas cylinders -- an empty one in the back seat and five full ones in the trunk -- although they did find three jerrycans of diesel fuel.
A notebook with Arabic writing in it was also found in the car, according to the prosecutor's office, which did not elaborate.
Amateur video footage showed the car parked with its hazard lights flashing. The district mayor said it sat that way for two hours before the police responded to a shopkeeper's call about a suspicious vehicle.
Altogether, seven people are now in police custody in connection with the car. In addition to the three women arrested on Thursday, the police have arrested four other people from the Loiret area in central France -- two brothers, ages 27 and 34, and their girlfriends, who are 26 and 29, according to the prosecutor's office, which did not say how any of them might be linked to the Peugeot.
But all four are suspected of being \"radical Islamists,\" the prosecutor's office said. One couple was arrested on Tuesday at a highway service area in southern France, and the other was arrested late Wednesday or early Thursday near the town of Montargis in Loiret.
Fears of an attack on large crowds in cities or at big events rose after a Tunisian man killed 86 people by driving a truck through crowds gathered to watch Bastille Day fireworks in Nice, France.
In a letter to the Paris Police prefect on Tuesday, the mayor of the Fifth Arrondissement, Florence Berthout, called for an increased presence of the police and military personnel to protect the thousands of students and tourists in the Latin Quarter, part of which is in the arrondissement.
The discovery of the car so close to the Seine and to popular tourist sites reinforced concern in the country about the effect of terrorism fears on tourism. Prime Minister Manuel Valls said on Wednesday that tourism indirectly and directly accounted for 2 million jobs in France, but that \"the attractiveness of France as a destination is nevertheless suffering from the consequences of the attacks in November 2015 and of July 2016,\" especially in and around Paris.
French officials have expressed concerns that militants sent by the Islamic State or inspired by its propaganda would change their tactics.
Patrick Calvar, the head of the France's domestic intelligence agency, said in May that he believed future Islamic State attacks would be carried out not with gunmen and suicide vests, but with car bombings and other explosive devices.
Word count: 767
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 9, 2016"
