"The Democrats on the House Select Committee on Benghazi issued their minority report Monday, absolving then-secretary of State Hillary Clinton of blame in the terror attacks in 2012 in which four Americans were killed.
The Democrat-only report, issued after more than two years of a Republican-led investigation that took place mostly in secret, concludes that the U.S. military was not ordered to delay its response on the night of the attacks that began Sept. 11, 2012.
\"We hope our report will put to rest the conspiracy theories about Benghazi once and for all and return the focus to where it belongs -- on the goal of improving the security of Americans serving abroad,\" according to the 339-page report.
The Democrats released findings independently of any forthcoming report from Rep. Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., and the panel's other Republicans.
\"We are issuing our own report today because, after spending more than two years and $7 million in taxpayer funds in one of the longest and most partisan congressional investigations in history, it is long past time for the Select Committee to conclude its work,\" the Democrats wrote.
A spokesman for Gowdy and the GOP committee members said the Democratic report shows that Democrats, not Republicans, were focused on Clinton.
\"As Chairman Gowdy has said, this is not about one person,\" GOP spokesman Matt Wolking said. \"This investigation is about the four brave Americans we lost in Libya: (Ambassador) Chris Stevens, Sean Smith, Tyrone Woods and Glen Doherty. That is how the majority has conducted its thorough investigation, and we look forward to revealing the new information we have uncovered to the families and the American people.\"
Gowdy has said the Republicans' report would be released before next month's national political conventions.
The Democrats, like previous congressional investigators, fault weak security at the U.S. facility in Benghazi and military resources that were not in a position to respond quickly enough to save lives.
Clinton, they concluded, did not personally deny requests for increased security at the vulnerable compound, and claims of an order that the military \"stand down\" in its rescue attempts are unsubstantiated.
A large part of the report attacks the Republicans for using the investigation as a political attack on Clinton, the presumptive Democratic nominee for president. Gowdy and the GOP have denied it was politically motivated, saying the inquiry is meant to be the final fact-based account of the circumstances before, during and after the attacks.
The terrorist attacks killed four Americans in 2012. Unsatisfied with previous congressional investigations, the House created a special investigative committee in May 2014. Despite a cordial beginning, the investigation became starkly partisan.
Democrats make several recommendations, including that the State Department coordinate with the Defense Department and intelligence agencies to \"assess the willingness and capacity of host governments to defend U.S. diplomatic facilities.
Credit: Mary Troyan, @orndorfftroyan, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images
Word count: 513
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
