"PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- A suicide bomber killed at least 11 people at a district court in northwestern Pakistan on Friday morning, a senior police officer said.
The bomber attacked the compound of the district court in the city of Mardan, throwing a hand grenade, opening fire at the main gate and then entering before detonating his explosive vest, said the police officer, Ijaz Khan. Twenty people were hurt, he said.
\"The bomber managed to get seven or eight meters inside the compound, but the police engaged him, prompting him to trigger his suicide vest,\" Mr. Khan said by telephone. The dead included four lawyers and two police officers, he said.
The president of the district bar association, Amir Hussain, said the toll would have been much higher had the bomber reached a part of the compound where lawyers assemble. \"The bomber was stopped a few meters inside the main gate,\" Mr. Hussain said. \"He couldn't reach the main sitting area.\"
It was the second mass attack in recent weeks that appeared to target lawyers. More than 70 people, mostly lawyers, were killed last month in an attack on a hospital in the city of Quetta, in Baluchistan Province, where lawyers had gathered after the president of Baluchistan's bar association was shot and killed.
Reuters reported that Jamaat-e-Ahrar, an offshoot of the Pakistani Taliban, had claimed responsibility for the assault in Mardan. That group and the Islamic State both claimed responsibility for the bombing in Quetta.
Earlier Friday, four suicide bombers attacked a Christian enclave west of Peshawar. The armed assailants struck the gated neighborhood, home to about 100 Christian employees of the nearby Warsak Dam, shortly before 6 a.m., the local news media quoted a military spokesman as saying.
All four attackers were killed. Shafqat Malik, who oversees a bomb disposal squad, said one bomber had detonated his explosive vest at the main entrance of the enclave, while another did so near a residential area.
Besides the attackers, three people were killed -- a soldier, a guard and a resident -- according to a senior security official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the media.
Paramilitary forces breached a wall of the enclave with a rocket, allowing security forces to engage the attackers quickly, said the official, who added that there could have been many more casualties if not for the rapid response.
Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.
Word count: 439
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 3, 2016"
