"CAIRO -- Iraq's foreign minister on Wednesday offered to mediate the fight raging between Saudi Arabia and Iran over the Saudi government's execution of a dissident Shiite cleric, saying that \"we need to stop the escalations.\"
The foreign minister, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, made his comments at a news conference in Tehran. They appeared to reflect fears in Iraq that the conflict between the Sunni monarchy of Saudi Arabia and the Shiite government of Iran could aggravate sectarian tensions at home, at a time when the Iraqi government is counting on the cooperation of Sunni and Shiite forces to defeat the Islamic State.
\"We need to stop the escalations of this problem and not allow enemies of the region and enemies of Islam to lead the region to a war in which everyone would lose,\" Mr. Jaafari said, according to a BBC transcript of his remarks.
The dispute was showing few signs of abating, however, as Saudi and Iranian officials continued to trade insults on Wednesday. And there was growing evidence to support Mr. Jaafari's concern about the rift's potential for intensifying regional tensions.
On Tuesday, the Saudi foreign minister, Adel al-Jubeir, denounced Iran in an interview with CNBC, reciting a list of crimes he said the Iranian government was responsible for, including, he said, the rise of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.
On Wednesday, President Hassan Rouhani of Iran, writing on Twitter, repeated his condemnations of attacks on Saudi diplomatic facilities in Iran in protests over the execution of the cleric, Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr. He accused Saudi Arabia of favoring \"chaos\" in the region and of executing Sheikh Nimr to \"cover up its domestic problems & failed regional policies.\"
\"Which country is exacerbating Sunni-Shia divide, bombing #Yemen & undermining governments in Iraq & Syria by providing funds &arms to #ISIS?\" Mr. Rouhani wrote in one post.
In Yemen, where the regional rivalry between Saudi Arabia and Iran has aggravated the civil war, the Saudi-led military coalition on Wednesday carried out some of its heaviest bombing in months on Sana, the capital.
Saudi Arabia intervened in Yemen's war last March, to defeat a Shiite-led Yemeni rebel group that the Saudis have asserted is an Iranian proxy force. The rebels, known as the Houthis, who control Sana, acknowledge ties to Iran's leadership, but they have long denied acting on Tehran's orders.
Also on Wednesday, the government of Bahrain, Saudi Arabia's closest ally in the Persian Gulf, said it had thwarted a bombing plot by a group the authorities said had received \"financial and logistical support\" from Iran and Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shiite militant group.
The timing of the announcement was notable: It came two days after Bahrain severed diplomatic relations with Iran, after a similar decision by Saudi Arabia. In announcing the cutting of diplomatic ties, Bahrain accused Iran of \"providing protection and support for terrorists and extremists and the smuggling of weapons of explosives for use by its affiliated terrorist cells.\"
A statement on the website of the official Bahrain News Agency accused suspects in the bombing plot of traveling to Iran and Lebanon and receiving money, though it did not disclose the intended target.
Bahrain's Sunni rulers have reported similar plots over the last few years. They have also regularly accused political opponents from the country's Shiite majority, who are calling for greater democracy in Bahrain, of working in league with Iran.
On Saturday, Bahrain's Interior Ministry threatened to prosecute anyone who criticized the Saudi government's execution of 47 people, including the cleric, saying it \"supported Saudi Arabia's right to take appropriate steps to maintain its own security and stability.\"
None of the region's Sunni monarchies have gone as far as Bahrain in severing links with Iran. The United Arab Emirates downgraded its diplomatic relationship, and Kuwait recalled its ambassador. On Wednesday, Qatar announced that it was also recalling its ambassador to Iran.
In Jordan, the Foreign Affairs Ministry summoned the Iranian ambassador to complain about the storming of the Saudi diplomatic mission in Iran, according to the official Petra news agency.
Credit: KAREEM FAHIM; Thomas Erdbrink contributed reporting from Tehran.
Word count: 695
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 7, 2016"
