"KABUL, Afghanistan -- Another district in the embattled southern province of Helmand fell to the Taliban on Tuesday, Afghan government officials said, adding important new territory to the insurgents' control.
A large number of Taliban fighters attacked the government center in Khan Neshin District late Monday night, with heavy firefights continuing until 5 a.m. Tuesday, when government defenders finally fled, according to Col. Allah Dad. Colonel Dad is the commander of the Fourth Battalion of the Afghan Border Police, which was in charge of the area.
Khan Neshin became the fifth of Helmand's 14 districts in which the government centers have fallen to the Taliban, mostly in recent months as a result of fighting that has continued at an intense pace through the winter. In at least two other districts, including Sangin and Kajaki, the Taliban control most of the territory except the government centers and are very active in at least four others, including part of the provincial capital. By many accounts, the insurgents control more than half of the provincial territory, and dominate much of the rest.
The Taliban advances have come despite stepped-up airstrikes by American warplanes in crucial districts, as well as involvement by American Special Operations force s on the ground. Last month, a new battalion of American soldiers, believed to number as many as 700, was sent to Helmand to provide support for Special Operations forces operating in the area, the United States military said. It was the largest new deployment of American soldiers outside a major base since the official end of the combat mission in December 2014.
Civilian officials also confirmed the fall of the Khan Neshin District headquarters Tuesday, and they complained about a lack of coordination between various Afghan security forces in charge in the area. \"I'm afraid if this continues the province of Helmand will fall soon,\" said Baryalia Nazari, a provincial council member.
Colonel Dad blamed the ability of the Taliban to infiltrate from neighboring Pakistan -- bringing in heavy weapons and other modern equipment, which he said included night vision gear that the Afghan forces lacked -- for the reversal. He also said American air support had been missing in that southern part of Helmand, but has now been promised for a planned push to retake Khan Neshin.
Gen. Abdul Rahman Sarjang, the provincial police chief, confirmed the capture of the district government facility, but said Afghan forces were able to fall back with light casualties and would soon retake the district. \"The Taliban only attack outposts and overrun them, and we are retaking those posts from them, so it does not mean they are dominating Helmand,\" General Sarjang said.
Two other important districts, Musa Qala and Now Zad, fell to the Taliban on Feb. 21. Nearby, the district of Sangin, where fighting throughout the war took more American and British lives than in any other single district, has been kept under government control only by the intercession of heavy American airstrikes and Special Operations troops, according to Afghan officials. In Kajaki, the government controls only the site of a major dam and hydroelectric station, where troops are surrounded by Taliban forces and resupplied mostly by air, according to Afghan officials who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to brief the news media.
General Sarjang, however, disputed the extent of the insurgents' control in Helmand.
\"The Taliban do not control half of Helmand, and we will not let them control it,\" he said. \"We are not denying they have strong presence in Helmand but they are always making propaganda that they will make the province fall, but it will never happen.\"
The general also promised that a spring offensive by government forces would reverse recent Taliban gains.
In Kabul on Tuesday, the secretary general of NATO, Jens Stoltenberg, appeared at a news conference with President Ashraf Ghani. In contrast to previous upbeat pronouncements about Afghanistan's future, Mr. Stoltenberg sounded a worried note. \"2015 was difficult,\" he said. \"I expect 2016 to be difficult also. But the Afghan forces responded to the threats.\"
There are about 10,000 American troops in Afghanistan, along with about 3,000 troops from coalition partners, mostly NATO countries.
Mr. Ghani said he still held out hope for progress on peace talks with the Taliban, although he did not mention whether planned talks scheduled for March -- and already overdue by two weeks -- were still on or not. Mr. Ghani also said security was improving in northern provinces, while two significant new units are being sent to reinforce the Afghan National Army's 215th Corps, which has been ravaged by the fighting in Helmand.
Credit: ROD NORDLAND and TAIMOOR SHAH; Rod Nordland reported from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from K andahar, Afghanistan. Mujib Mashal contributed reporting from Kabul.
Word count: 809
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 16, 2016"
