"DAKAR, Senegal -- A new voice recording described by security experts as coming from the longtime leader of Boko Haram deepened speculation about a fracture in the militant group, which has pledged allegiance to the Islamic State and has terrorized Nigeria and its neighbors for years.
In the 10-minute recording uploaded to YouTube Wednesday night, the Boko Haram leader, Abubakar Shekau, referred to what appeared to be a split in Boko Haram over whether Muslims who live among nonbelievers are good Muslims whose lives deserve to be spared.
Several analysts said they were confident the recording was of Mr. Shekau's voice.
The recording emerged hours after an Islamic State publication distributed on the internet referred to another Boko Haram figure, Abu Musab al-Barnawi, as \"governor\" of the group. Mr. al-Barnawi was formerly thought to be merely a spokesman. The new title suggested that perhaps he was running Boko Haram now.
The article caught the attention of Mr. Shekau, who had not been heard from in months and presumably rushed to broadcast his response. \"My brothers in Allah,\" he began, directly addressing Islamic State leaders. \"I received a message that you sent regarding placing a new governor.\"
Taken together, the Islamic State publication and Mr. Shekau's recording suggest he is leading a Boko Haram faction bent on indiscriminate killing, while Mr. Barnawi is leading a group that might be more willing to show mercy to Muslims.
Mr. Shekau's message, translated by the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors militant jihadist media, was an extraordinary public airing of a dispute in the ranks of one of the world's most brazen terrorist groups.
Looming over the dispute is an apparent quest from both sides for the Islamic State's approval. In the recording, Mr. Shekau complained that the Islamic State had been ignoring him.
\"It's a very public divorce in many ways,\" said Yan St-Pierre, a counterterrorism adviser and chief executive of the Modern Security Consulting Group in Berlin.
Boko Haram has for years waged a campaign of beheadings, bombings and hostage-taking across northeastern Nigeria. A multinational offensive that began last year, led by the Nigerian military, has scattered the group and left its fighters scrambling for resources. The new fractures could be devastating.
\"This could weaken them like it does any organization,\" Mr. St-Pierre said. \"And that could play into the Nigerian military's favor.\"
Some analysts point out that Boko Haram has a long history of divisions, but the most recent one is especially pronounced. Propelling the fractures now is the belief that Mr. Shekau is becoming increasingly unstable, summarily killing top leaders he thinks are informants, said Jennifer G. Cooke, director of the Africa program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, who is currently in northeastern Nigeria.
Since Boko Haram pledged allegiance to the Islamic State last year, analysts have puzzled over how much assistance the group has provided. American military officials say the two organizations have been working more closely together. The audio recording at least suggested that Mr. Shekau values the Islamic State's opinion.
It also immediately laid out an ideological divergence between him and Mr. Barnawi that seems to be centered on Mr. Shekau's targeting of mosques and other places attended by Muslims. Boko Haram has long sent suicide bombers to religious gatherings and markets in Muslim areas.
Mr. Shekau's recording said Mr. Barnawi and his followers believed that Muslims could live among nonbelievers and still be considered good Muslims. \"However, we say such a person is a disbeliever,\" Mr. Shekau said.
He said he had tried to explain his position in eight letters to the Islamic State but had gotten no response. Some analysts think the group's lack of reply may indicate a broader rebuffing of Mr. Shekau.
Regardless, the Islamic State's apparent backing of someone who seems to support a softer line may seem incongruous with the brutality across the Middle East and Europe that it is known for.
But the area where Boko Haram operates in Africa is a different, and mostly Muslim, venue. Other terrorist groups with links to Al Qaeda, a rival to the Islamic State, have had major victories in areas like northern Mali by invading and winning over the locals. When Boko Haram invades, it typically kills much of the population and takes the rest hostage.
AuthorAffiliation
DIONNE SEARCEY Follow Dionne Searcey @dionnesearcey on Twitter.
Credit: DIONNE SEARCEY; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.
Word count: 756
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 5, 2016"
