"JERUSALEM -- The Israeli military said Monday that a soldier was under investigation for the death of an unarmed Palestinian man who was shot in the Israeli-occupied West Bank on Friday. Questions about the shooting are feeding a stormy debate about open-fire regulations and the use of force during a wave of violence that began in October but appeared to have been waning recently.
The military police investigation into the death of Iyad Hamed, 38, from the West Bank town of Silwad, comes on the heels of the high-profile case of an Israeli soldier, Sgt. Elor Azaria, who is standing trial in a military court on a manslaughter charge after he fatally shot a wounded and disarmed Palestinian assailant in the West Bank city of Hebron in March.
The Azaria case has caused an uproar in Israel, pitting senior military and government officials, who condemned the sergeant's actions, against his supporters, who hailed him as a hero.
That episode most likely contributed to the forced resignation of the Israeli defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, and his replacement by a political hard-liner, Avigdor Lieberman, as part of a government coalition deal in May.
Before taking up his new post, Mr. Lieberman, a blunt-talking former foreign minister, had denounced the handling of the Azaria case by Mr. Yaalon and the military high command, and demonstrated his support for the sergeant by showing up at a hearing at the military court.
In public remarks on Monday, Mr. Lieberman criticized the news media, saying that only the courts can judge and convict people. \"A person is innocent until proven guilty,\" he said, adding that the principle applied to Sergeant Azaria as well as to the soldier who shot Mr. Hamed on Friday.
That soldier, from an infantry battalion that caters to strictly Orthodox Jewish recruits, has not been identified.
\"It is worth remembering that people who are fighting terrorism day in, day out, who are fighting against terrorists, cannot set out on a mission with a lawyer by their side,\" Mr. Lieberman said, adding, \"So sometimes the consideration is right and sometimes it is not, but we cannot reach a situation where a soldier must ask for a lawyer before going on a mission.\"
Sergeant Azaria has pleaded not guilty. His lawyers have argued that he felt threatened by the wounded Palestinian assailant, Abdel Fattah al-Sharif, who was moving slightly, and, fearing that he was concealing an explosive belt under his jacket, shot him in the head.
Testifying in June, the company commander, Maj. Tom Naaman, said he \"did not feel any danger\" from Mr. Sharif and saw no justification for the shooting.
But on Monday, a platoon commander who was not identified testified in Sergeant Azaria's defense, saying that he had instructed his soldiers to keep their distance from Mr. Sharif because he had not yet been checked for explosives, according to an account of the court proceedings in the Israeli news media.
Mr. Hamed was killed on Friday near an army post between Silwad, his hometown north of Ramallah, and Ofra, an Israeli settlement in the area.
Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, a military spokesman, said that according to the initial report received from the forces on the ground at the time, Mr. Hamed was running toward soldiers outside a guard tower when he was shot. According to the soldiers' account, they ordered him to stop, fired warning shots into the air and shot him after he failed to comply.
But residents of Silwad said that Mr. Hamed, a father of two, was on his way to pray in the nearby village of Ein Yabrud when he was killed. They said he was mentally challenged and was killed for no reason.
\"I am afraid for the lives of my children and grandchildren,\" Maryam Hamad, 81, a Silwad resident, said in an interview, expressing the fears of many Palestinians who view Israeli forces as trigger-happy. (Many town residents belong to two large clans named Hamed and Hamad.)
The Palestinian Authority Ministry of Foreign Affairs described the killing of Mr. Hamed as a \"field execution\" and a \"brutal crime.\" In a statement, the ministry identified Mr. Hamed as an American citizen, but a spokesman at the United States Consulate General in Jerusalem said that was not the case. Many Palestinian families in the towns and villages north of Ramallah have relatives living in the United States.
Since October, Palestinian assailants have killed more than 30 Israelis in stabbing, shooting and car-ramming attacks. More than 210 Palestinians have been killed in the same period, most of them while carrying out or attempting to carry out attacks, according to the Israelis.
The Israeli military is carrying out investigations of more than 20 cases of Palestinians killed since October, Colonel Lerner said. The Azaria case is the only one so far in which charges have been filed.
Photograph
The Funeral of Iyad Hamed, a 38-Year-Old Palestinian Who Was Shot by the Military in the Israeli-Occupied West Bank On Friday. (Photograph by Abbas Momani/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 858
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 30, 2016"
