"PARIS -- Concerns over security at Brussels Airport have delayed its reopening, the airport operator said on Friday, more than a week after two suicide bombers heavily damaged the departure terminal.
Florence Muls, a spokeswoman for the airport, said that it was unclear whether it would be able to open on Saturday morning.
\"We are still waiting for a green light from the federal police,\" Ms. Muls said, adding that airport security was not directly managed by the airport authorities. She said the reopening would depend on the outcome of labor negotiations between unions representing police officers at the airport and the Interior Ministry.
The unions have been discussing their security concerns with senior management in the Belgian federal police before and after the terrorist attack on March 22, in which two suicide bombers detonated explosives in the departure hall just before 8 a.m. The unions have threatened not to go back to work if their requests for additional safety measures are not addressed.
The Belgian government met on Friday to discuss the reopening of the airport, which is several miles northeast of Brussels, in Zaventem. But officials said afterward that they would wait for the negotiations between unions and police officials to succeed before setting a date for the reopening.
\"For us, security is paramount, but we have to find solutions at the negotiating table with police unions,\" the deputy prime minister, Kris Peeters, said after the meeting. \"I hope that we are going to find solutions as quickly as possible.\"
In a statement on Thursday, the airport authority said that the airport was \"technically ready\" to resume commercial flights, using a temporary setup for passenger check-ins. Ms. Muls said that the airport would be able to process 800 departing passengers an hour, about 20 percent of its normal capacity.
The airport has been closed since the attacks that killed 32 people and injured hundreds.
A third suicide bomber attacked the Maelbeek subway station in Brussels, near the European Union headquarters, more than an hour after the airport bombings. Subway service in the Belgian capital is still disrupted.
On Wednesday, a group of police officers working at the airport wrote an open letter expressing deep concern about the absence of security checks for nontravelers entering the airport and about the number of baggage handlers and other staff members suspected of having criminal records or of being sympathetic to the Islamic State.
Vincent Gilles, the head of Belgium's largest police union, said on Thursday that repeated requests for increased security at the airport before the attacks went unheeded and that a request made in December to install a security check outside the entrance to the airport terminal had been rebuffed.
Arnaud Feist, the chief executive of Brussels Airport, told the Belgian broadcasting company RTBF on Friday that setting up checks at entrances would only move the threat outside the building.
\"A fairly compact grouping of people standing in line might be more problematic than people who are spread out in the airport,\" he said.
He also said he was not aware of any airport workers with criminal records or who were sympathetic to the Islamic State.
Separately, news agencies reported on Friday that an Italian court had approved the extradition to Belgium of an Algerian man who was arrested last week in Salerno and accused of forging documents used by people involved in the March 22 attacks in Brussels and the Paris attacks in November.
Credit: AURELIEN BREEDEN; Nicola Clark contributed reporting from Paris.
Word count: 596
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 2, 2016"
