"PARIS -- The first nights after the Nov. 13 attacks in and around Paris, dancers at the Crazy Horse cabaret donned their sequins and gamely performed \"La Marseillaise\" before empty tables and uncorked Champagne bottles.
The coordinated assaults -- aimed at cafes and restaurants, a concert hall and a sports stadium -- struck at the heart of a city famed for its night life, where the cancan first appeared, where Toulouse-Lautrec painted the demimonde, and where Hemingway and his Lost Generation debated literature on terraces.
In the following days, museums were closed by executive order, school trips were canceled and movie theaters shut their doors. Parisians and tourists who worried about security stayed away from public spaces and mass transit.
Nightclub impresarios and museum directors alike wondered when the crowds would return, a concern made even more pressing by memories of the attacks a year ago Thursday at the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo and a kosher grocery.
Now, there are signs of a recovery -- attendance at the Musée d'Orsay at the end of last year appeared to be returning to normal, for example -- but revival has been slower at other venues.
The management of the Crazy Horse, near the Champs-Élysées, said revenues since Nov. 13 were down 50 percent from the same period last year. In response, the cabaret has cut ticket prices to 75 euros, or about $81, from [euro]125, and has rushed into production a new show starring the American burlesque artist Dita Von Teese.
\"The cabarets are very Parisian institutions, important for social life and the attractions of Paris worldwide. But we are especially damaged by the situation,\" Philippe Lhomme, the owner of the Crazy Horse and the head of a trade association of cabarets and bars, said this week. \"All of us, from the Crazy Horse to the Moulin Rouge, are affected.\"
On the Left Bank, attendance at the Rodin Museum, which reopened its newly restored mansion the day before the attacks, fell 21 percent last year, compared with 2014, to 545,000 visitors.
Part of that drop was due to an extended closing for a $17.7 million makeover. But expected post-renovation numbers of 2,000 visitors a day failed to materialize; daily attendance has been 1,300 to 1,500, museum officials said.
The museum has also closed its branch outside Paris in Meudon, where Rodin lived, so it could shift guards from there to the main museum to increase security.
\"After this shock, the first three weeks in November were really bad,\" said Clémence Goldberger, a spokeswoman for the museum. \"In December, people tried to get in the Christmas spirit, but they were focusing more on their Christmas shopping,\" she said, noting a flood of cancellations by school and adult groups.
At the Louvre, visitor numbers were down almost 7 percent last year, compared with 2014, to 8.7 million, including a steeper fall in French visitors. Attendance at the Orsay fell 1 percent, but it was given a boost by a popular exhibition on prostitution. The Orangerie, which is operated by the Orsay and is home to Monet's \"Water Lilies,\" was hard hit by a plunge in the number of Japanese tourists, said Amélie Hardivillier, the museum's spokeswoman.
The Pompidou Center has not yet released attendance figures for 2015, but it is scheduled to hold a conference in early February that will address issues of terrorism and violence in public spaces.
Museums, theaters and businesses have joined in various public campaigns to appeal to visitors to return to cultural events, particularly as a way to show defiance in the face of terror and extremism.
Both the Crazy Horse and the Pompidou Center are participating in a social media campaign called #ParisWeLoveYou that invites people to share their memories and photographs of the capital.
Mr. Lhomme said that young people, in particular, were responding to the appeal, including a campaign last month called #MaPlaceEstDansLaSalle, or \"My Place Is in the Theater,\" with celebrities and performers urging people to come back.
\"They are the ones who are really standing up,\" he said. \"They understand the message. If we give up now, we will never be the same Paris.\"
Prodiss, a trade group for live music promoters and venues in France, is starting another campaign this month called \"Plus Que Jamais,\" or \"More Than Ever,\" which will address security measures.
Aline Renet, a strategy adviser for Prodiss, said that ticket sales fell 80 percent immediately after the attacks, in which 90 people died at the Bataclan theater, a member of the organization. Sales bounced back in the following weeks, she said, but were still down 25 percent this week.
\"The Parisians showed clearly their will to culturally resist by attending shows,\" Ms. Renet said. \"Art and culture are fully part of our DNA.\"
Attendance figures aside, museums and night spots are seeing other signs that life is gradually returning to normal. One of the first school groups returned to the Musée d'Orsay this week, and at the Moulin Rouge -- with its landmark red windmill over the Pigalle neighborhood -- selfie-snapping tourists, who vanished after the attacks, are reappearing, said Fanny Rabasse, the marketing director for the cabaret, which dates from 1889.
Bookings were down 20 percent for the Moulin Rouge's prime New Year's Eve show, but the club's 900 seats were filled for the previous three nights, she said.
Unlike the Crazy Horse, the Moulin Rouge is not offering discounts.
\"We don't have a need to reduce prices,\" Ms. Rabasse said. \"We're a symbol of Paris. And life will continue as it always has.\"
Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.
Photograph
Outside the Moulin Rouge On Wednesday Night. The Cabaret's Marketing Director Says Tourists Have Begun Returning for Selfies in Front of the Landmark Windmill.; On Wednesday at the Rodin Museum, Where Attendance Fell 21 Percent Last Year, Compared with 2014, to 545,000 Visitors. (Photographs by Agnes Dherbeys for the New York Times)
Word count: 1025
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 8, 2016"
