"When the Euro 2016 soccer tournament starts Friday, security guard Salim Toorabally will be at the entrance to Stade de France to watch over fans with a keen eye for terrorists.
On another Friday last year, Toorabally stopped a bomber from entering the stadium as a string of suicide attacks in Paris killed 130 people. France's soccer match against Germany that Nov.13 was halted because of the attacks.
Toorabally, considered a local hero after he prevented deaths and helped carry people to safety, said he wanted to be at the stadium for the upcoming match to show his solidarity with the victims.
France is on high alert as it prepares to welcome 10 million fans for Europe's biggest soccer tournament, seven months after the coordinated attacks by the Islamic State on the stadium, downtown restaurants and a music venue shook this city.
President Franois Hollande acknowledged the terrorist threat Sunday but said the tournament would go ahead as planned. And a Frenchman was arrested for plotting terrorist attacks at the soccer tournament, Ukraine's intelligence agency announced Monday.
Toorabally says he's confident that security measures put into place after the November attacks can keep fans safe in the 10 stadiums around France that will host the Euro 2016 matches.
\"I am not at all worried,\" he said. \"We perform body searches. We check inside jackets. We look in the bags.\"
The Interior Ministry announced about 90,000 security staff were being deployed at strategic locations, such as airports and train stations, to form an \"exceptional security apparatus in an exceptional context.\"
Some doubts remain. \"This is pure madness,\" said Yves Lefebvre, leader of a police union. \"It's not realistic to ensure the security of the Euro.\" He said police were exhausted from enforcing the country's state of emergency introduced after the November attacks and handling a wave of labor strikes and protests sparked by a proposed law.
Recent flooding as the Seine River overflowed its banks added to the city's concerns.
\"We are not able to guarantee an optimal level of security,\" Michel Cadot, head of the Paris Police Prefecture, wrote in a memo to the Interior Ministry, according to a recent report by Le Point newspaper.
His primary concerns include huge, open-access fan zones to be set up away from the stadiums so people can watch live transmissions of the games on giant screens.
One at the foot of the Eiffel Tower is designed for up to 92,000 people. Cadot wants it shut down when matches are held in the capital. If not, the lack of manpower will mean \"all sites cannot be protected at the same time.\"
The threat of terrorism could be compounded by confrontations between rival team supporters.
\"Terror attacks are our first concern, (but) we are afraid of hooligans, of thugs,\" said Audrey Levavasseur, an aide to the mayor of Paris' 15th district where the Eiffel Tower is situated.
Credit: Maya Vidon, @mayavidon, Special for USA TODAY Sports
Illustration
photo KENZO TRIBOUILLARD, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 531
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
