"NEW DELHI -- Indian officials on Thursday said they would reschedule diplomatic talks with Pakistan, originally planned for Friday, \"in the very near future,\" expressing satisfaction with Pakistan's arrest of militants thought to be connected to a recent attack on Indian soil.
The remarks came a day after Pakistan announced the arrests of several members of Jaish-e-Muhammad, a banned group that is accused of staging a terrorist attack this month on an Indian air force base in Pathankot, in Punjab State. All six assailants and seven Indian security personnel died in the attack.
\"The action taken against Jaish-e-Muhammad is an important and positive first step,\" said Vikas Swarup, a spokesman for India's Ministry of External Affairs, at a news briefing in New Delhi.
Jaish-e-Muhammad has carried out attacks in the Indian-administered part of Kashmir, the disputed border region, and Pakistani officials say the group has ties to the Pakistani Taliban and to Al Qaeda.
Pakistani news reports also claimed that the group's leader, Maulana Masood Azhar, one of India's most wanted terrorists, had also been arrested, but Mr. Swarup said India had no knowledge of his arrest.
On Wednesday, the chief of the Pakistani Army attended a meeting called by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, and observers in both countries were watching closely to see whether Mr. Sharif, rather than military leaders, had taken a bigger role in shaping policy toward India.
Vivek Katju, a former Indian ambassador to Afghanistan, said he was unsure whether the Pakistani Army was willing to repudiate what he called its \"low-intensity war\" against India.
\"Pakistan's army in the past has controlled Pakistan's foreign and security policy,\" he said. \"I don't see it giving up that position.\"
Relations between India and Pakistan, which chilled soon after Mr. Sharif attended Narendra Modi's inauguration ceremony as India's prime minister in 2014, took a sudden and warmer turn last month, when Mr. Modi made an unscheduled visit to Lahore, Pakistan, on Dec. 25.
A week after Mr. Modi's visit, though, six gunmen infiltrated the Pathankot air force base in what analysts read as an attempt to derail the peace process. G. Parthasarathy, a former Indian ambassador to Pakistan, said he believed that the attack had required months of careful planning and ground support.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Word count: 402
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 15, 2016"
