"Democratic partisans have seized on the movie 13 Hours: The Secret Soldiers of Benghazi, which portrays the fateful night that left four Americans dead, including a U.S. ambassador. They've gone on the attack against what director Michael Bay calls in the opening scene a \"true story\" as nothing but a \"partisan witch hunt,\" as David Brock put it, and an attempt to affect the political debate during an election year. Hillary Clinton has not seen the film but said on Meet the Press, \"People have raised questions about some of the dramatization.\"
Yes, the film is dramatic. How could the portrayal of a 13-hour attack by armed militants on a U.S. diplomatic mission and CIA annex be otherwise? But it's also a non-political rendering. Clinton is never mentioned, and President Obama makes a single brief appearance. Bay stuck closely to the story told in the best-selling book by Boston University journalism professor Mitchell Zuckoff and five CIA contractors who survived the attack in Libya on Sep. 11, 2012. (A sixth contractor died.)
Three of the former elite military officers portrayed in the movie -- Mark \"Oz\" Geist, Kris \"Tanto\" Paronto and John \"Tig\" Tiegen -- told me that the movie accurately reflected their experience on the ground.
\"We wanted the movie to just tell the truth and tell the story as we lived it,\" Geist said. \"Don't make it into something political.\"
This story is \"about overcoming adversity, faith in God, standing with your brothers, never quitting and never giving up,\" Paronto added. \"That's what (people) should be thinking about when they hear about Benghazi.\"
Because the news media have mostly treated the Benghazi attack as a partisan political story, most Americans still don't know what actually happened.
A bearded and buff John Krasinski -- best known as the quirky Jim Halpert on The Office -- was transformed to play former Navy SEAL Jack Silva. He was drawn to the project because, he told me, \"I was slightly embarrassed I didn't know this story. I consider myself a responsible citizen, and I thought I knew what was going on. But I had never heard about these six guys.\"
Sure to anger Obama administration supporters are the fleeting, but damning, references to the absurd assertion that the attack grew out of a YouTube video protest, as well as scenes exposing bureaucratic incompetence and negligence both before and after the attack began.
Perhaps nothing has caused more consternation than a scene depicting the CIA bureau chief giving the men a \"stand down\" order when they sought permission to save Ambassador Christopher Stevens. \"The words were said to me,\" Tiegen told me.
Americans can decide who they want to believe: the people who lived through the attack or the bungling and partisan bureaucrats who have yet to take full responsibility. \"The truth is not partisan,\" Paronto told me.
Or at least it shouldn't be.
Kirsten Powers writes weekly for USA TODAY.
Word count: 510
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
