"Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump is \"playing into the hands\" of the Islamic State group by wrongly implying there is a clash between the values of the West and mainstream Muslims, London's Muslim mayor said.
Sadiq Khan, who became the first Muslim mayor of a major Western capital in May, reiterated his support for Trump's Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton, in the election in November.
At the launch of London's Autumn Season, a program of cultural events and exhibitions in the British capital in the fall, Khan told USA TODAY he wants Trump to visit the city, an offer he first made soon after being elected mayor.
\"I'm really keen for Donald Trump to come to London because Donald Trump, it appears to me, is under the impression that Western liberal values are incompatible with mainstream Islam,\" he said. \"I want him to come to London to meet Londoners of Islamic faith who love being British, love being a Londoner, love being a Muslim.
\"I've got friends and family in America who are proud Americans, proud Muslims, and he needs to recognize that he's inadvertently playing into the hands of Daesh (Arabic acronym for the Islamic State) or so-called ISIL and ISIS by giving the impression there is a clash between the West and mainstream Muslims. There isn't.\"
Trump and Khan have clashed over the Republican's proposal to temporarily ban Muslims from entering the USA to prevent terrorists from sneaking into the country.
In an interview with Time soon after he was elected, Khan said such restrictions on his faith would prevent him from traveling to the USA to exchange ideas with American mayors if Trump became president.
Soon afterward, Trump suggested there could be exceptions to his proposed ban, which Khan rejected.
Trump then challenged Khan to an IQ test after Khan said Trump's view on Islam was ignorant.
The mayor's office shot down the idea.
Khan plans to visit the USA and Canada next month. The U.S. trip will include stops in Chicago and New York.
Khan said he was looking forward to meeting Clinton on the trip.
\"You've got a very big thing happening in November. I'm obviously keen to make sure the right candidate wins, and she's got my support,\" he said.
The Trump campaign did not respond to a request for comment.
Credit: Jane Onyanga-Omara, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo WILL OLIVER, European Pressphoto Agency
Word count: 431
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
