"There are more effective ways to protect Muslim pupils than the government's Prevent strategy, says a Muslim educator
The policy response to the threat of radicalisation has focused on law, security and intelligence. As the problem spirals out of control, this one-dimensional response, which includes the government's Prevent policy in schools, seems merely to be repeated more aggressively. Applying security and surveillance policy across society not only risks limiting civil liberties, but also isolating mainstream Muslims. This does not counter the manipulative interpretation of Islam being used by extremists to play upon grievances held by some Muslims.
A sensible alternative is a long-term educational policy that would support Muslim communities to address the rise of religious extremism in their midst. Since 9/11, official counter-terrorism policy has largely been determined by right- and left-leaning thinktanks. Rightwing pundits tend to explain Islamic extremism by the supposed inability of Islam to reform itself, together with Muslims' unwillingness to integrate into wider society. Analysts on the left try to understand extremist action as a political struggle that has almost nothing to do with religion. While the former avoids sharing responsibility for addressing the root causes of the problem, the latter dismisses the possibility that a form of theology defines the central ideology of Islamic extremism.
The heart of the problem is the predominance of an indoctrinatory approach to learning and teaching about Islam. This confines Islamic education to uncritical transmission of a revered set of texts. This form of Islamic education is exploited by extremist recruiters in both majority and minority Muslim societies.
Islam has a rich heritage of critical education and shares with Abrahamic faiths the prophetic educational teachings that call for continuous self-examination, so that the faithful remain balanced in their religious observance.
Extremism relates to a form of religiosity involving a highly rigid interpretation of Islam. A complex mix of individual or collective identity needs, peer pressure and personal grievances -- including Islamophobia -- has led some young Muslims gradually to adopt an extremist personality. This has been nurtured by formal and informal indoctrinatory educational activities that use a narrow religious content which shapes the ideology of religious extremism. The results can leave people vulnerable to negative influences and be used to legitimise irrational hatred via an \"us versus them\" narrative.
To tackle this we need to challenge indoctrinatory practices, including those on the internet. We need to provide young Muslims with Islamic literacy that integrates reflective thinking skills and intercultural understanding to help them engage intelligently and confidently with their faith heritage and wider society. Unfortunately, so far neither Muslim communities nor educational policymakers have shown interest in developing such alternative educational models.
For more than a decade, I have been exploring how stagnant Islamic education practices have nurtured \"foreclosed\" religiosities among Muslim youth in Britain.
My research has revealed three types of \"religiosities\". The first is an exploratory religious identity, mostly observed among female and younger age groups who want the relevance of Islam to be demonstrated rather than merely asserted; the second is a \"diffused identity\" where Islam only functions as a cultural sentiment; the third is a \"foreclosed\" religiosity, rendering individuals vulnerable to radical voices. In response, I've developed a critical and reflective Islamic education programme to meet the changing needs of British Muslim children.
Various Muslim faith leaders and teachers have now been trained in this programme. The evidence shows it offers a practical model for addressing the foundations of radicalisation among British Muslim youth, and enables direct action at community level. Beyond primary prevention, this model should also be part of the rehabilitation of returning foreign fighters and others who have undergone Islamic indoctrination.
The kind of inclusive religious education provided in many community schools would complement such an approach by enabling students, including young Muslims, to develop a contextual understanding of Islam and its contemporary expressions. Instead of surveillance, schools need to encourage collaboration between RE teachers and Muslim educators. This would help pupils to be better informed about Islam and build competence among Muslim students to challenge rigid interpretations of their own religion.
Currently, there is no specialist Muslim teacher-training provision and no community-based educational oversight of diverse Muslim educational institutions in the UK. In cooperation with the universities and relevant authorities, Muslim communities need to develop a set of educational benchmarks and standards for the teaching of Islam within diverse Muslim educational settings including madrassas and mosques. A specialist watchdog could be established to monitor standards, especially for the teaching of Islam in prisons.
Islamic extremism can be defeated by robust and competent internal Islamic intervention. The struggle against extremism needs to include a measured, long-term educational response where Muslim communities, without being stigmatised, can join wider civil and educational efforts to counter it.
Dr Abdullah Sahin is author of New Directions in Islamic Education: Pedagogy and Identity Formation, and senior lecturer in Islamic studies and education at Markfield Institute of Higher Education, Leicestershire
Credit: Abdullah Sahin
Word count: 836
(Copyright , Guardian Newspapers Limited, Jan 13, 2016)"
