"A White House spokesman criticized Senator Chuck Schumer of New York sharply on Wednesday, questioning his credibility on national security issues after Mr. Schumer and New York City officials challenged the Obama administration's decision to reduce financing for a grant program that supports local counterterrorism efforts.
Mr. Schumer, a Democrat set to become the party's Senate leader, drew the administration's ire after complaining this week about a plan to cut annual funding for the Urban Area Security Initiative to $330 million from $600 million.
Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, and the city's police and fire commissioners joined Mr. Schumer in denouncing the move on Wednesday. A short time later, the White House spokesman, Josh Earnest, took aim at Mr. Schumer.
\"At some point, Senator Schumer's credibility in talking about national security issues, particularly when the facts are as they are when it relates to homeland security, have to be affected by the position that he's taken on other issues,\" Mr. Earnest said. \"Senator Schumer is somebody that came out and opposed the international agreement to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. He was wrong about that position,\" Mr. Earnest added, \"and when people look at the facts here when it comes to funding for homeland security, they'll recognize that he's wrong this time, too.\"
Financing for the program was being reduced, Mr. Earnest said, because New York had not spent the money it had already received.
Of $760 million given to the city and state in homeland security grants over the past few years, $620 million remained unspent, the Homeland Security Department said. Still, the Obama administration proposed increasing the funding available to the state by an additional $255 million in the 2017 fiscal year, Mr. Earnest said.
Mr. Schumer, while acknowledging that New York had not spent the money it had gotten, said the financing remained vital.
\"Some bureaucrat came up with this idea, and it rose to a top level without it being stopped,\" he said of the planned cut. \"I think this administration does a very good job on terrorism. I think they're very cognizant of the need and of given resources. But, here they made a big mistake, and the mistake shouldn't stand.\"
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton called the planned cuts \"unconscionable.\"
Stephen P. Davis, the Police Department's chief spokesman, issued a statement defending the New York officials' position.
\"We stand fully behind the police commissioner, mayor, and senator's earlier statement,\" Mr. Davis said. \"The administration's current budget reduces our federal terrorism funding by half, with real impact to New Yorkers who live in the country's top terrorist target.\"
Credit: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Word count: 451
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 18, 2016"
