"ISTANBUL -- A suicide bomber struck at the heart of Istanbul's most popular avenue on Saturday, killing at least four people, including two Americans, and wounding 36, officials said.
A spokesman for the State Department, John Kirby, confirmed on Saturday afternoon that two American citizens, Yonathan Suher and Avraham Goldman, had been killed. No other details were available.
Earlier, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel announced that two Israelis had died in the blast, and that a third Israeli might also be among the dead, but he did not give their names. Emmanuel Nahshon, the spokesman for Israel's foreign ministry, later confirmed that two of the victims held dual Israeli-American citizenship. He was presumably referring to Mr. Suher and Mr. Goldman, but Israel had not yet released their names.
In addition, 11 Israelis were wounded, Israeli officials said. Mr. Netanyahu said there was no immediate evidence that the attack had been aimed at Israelis.
It was the latest in a string of urban terrorist attacks that have underscored Turkey's vulnerability as the country faces a revitalized Kurdish insurgency and a deeper involvement in Syria's war and refugee crisis.
The blast hit an area favored by tourists on the central Istiklal Street, near shops, cafes and foreign consulates.
Istiklal Street, which is normally bustling on weekends, had been eerily quiet in recent days. Residents were still reeling from an attack in Ankara last week, and various foreign missions in the vicinity had expressed their concern over the possibility of new terrorist attacks.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility for Saturday's attack, but Turkish officials said it could have been carried out by militants from the Islamic State group or from the Kurdistan Workers' Party, which has waged a long insurgency against Turkey for increased Kurdish autonomy.
Violence has surged in Turkey in recent months as the military launched a counterinsurgency campaign in the southeast in response to the breakdown of a cease-fire by Kurdish militants in July.
Security had been tightened in Ankara and Istanbul, and anxiety was running high.
Many Turks in Taksim Square said that they had been expecting another attack, and that it was only a matter of when.
Cagla Ozelikan, 16, said she rushed to Taksim Square after she heard the explosion to check on her boyfriend's safety.
\"Bombs are exploding everywhere, and it was certain this explosion was coming,\" Ms. Ozelikan said.
\"And it is going to go on like that.\"
Credit: SAFAK TIMUR and CEYLAN YEGINSU; Safak Timur reported from Istanbul, and Ceylan Yeginsu from Canakkale, Turkey. Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from Jerusalem.
Word count: 446
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 20, 2016"
