"KABUL, Afghanistan -- Taliban insurgents bombed a convoy of buses carrying police cadets on the outskirts of Kabul, the Afghan capital, on Thursday, killing at least 33 people, including four civilians, according to government officials and the United Nations.
During a year of surging violence across Afghanistan, the government and its foreign allies have failed to coax the Taliban into participating in peace talks, or even into agreeing on a cease-fire that would have lasted during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, which will end next week.
The bombings were the second large-scale assault by the Taliban in Kabul in less than two weeks. On June 20, a suicide bomber detonated his explosives next to a minibus shuttling Nepalese and Indian security guards to work at the Canadian Embassy, in one of the deadliest attacks on foreign contractors in the capital.
On Thursday, the insurgents appeared to have employed a familiar attack strategy intended to maximize casualties as well as show the reach of the Taliban even in well-secured cities like the capital.
The police convoy, which carried 215 cadets in five buses, was first hit by a car bomb that destroyed two of the buses, according to Mohamed Musa Rahmati, the governor of the district where the attack occurred. A short while later, a suicide bomber detonated explosives on his body as passengers on other buses came to the aid of the injured, according to a statement by the United Nations mission in Afghanistan.
The cadets had recently graduated from a police academy in Wardak Province, west of the capital, and were traveling to Kabul for their first assignments, Mr. Rahmati said.
After the explosions, relatives conducted frantic and sometimes futile searches of the city's hospitals. Noryalay Yaqoubi found an injured brother at Emergency, a trauma hospital in the city, but was still missing a family member. \"We cannot find our uncle,\" he said. \"We searched everywhere and he was nowhere. We think he is dead, and maybe they took him to a military hospital.\"
Outside the hospital were family members angry that officials had not provided more help. \"What kind of government is this?\" said Amin, 52, who uses just one name. He was searching for a nephew. \"We are not able to find our relatives, dead or alive. We are serving this government, but no one is helping us.\"
Inside the hospital, Mohamed Jawed, a cadet who suffered head injuries, struggled to describe how he had survived. After the first, \"very strong\" explosion, he managed to get off the bus, and heard the second blast. Mr. Jawed, who said he was a refugee in Iran until he attended the police academy two months ago, took a taxi to the hospital on Thursday.
The recent attacks in the capital, both on buses, have raised questions about safety measures for the transport of security personnel, who are frequently targeted by insurgents. The Nepalese and Indian security contractors killed last week were traveling in an ordinary minibus, rather than the armored vehicles that many Western security contractors use.
The police cadets were even more visible as they traveled toward Kabul in large green school buses. In a statement after the bombing, President Ashraf Ghani called for an investigation into the decision to use a convoy of buses.
Credit: KAREEM FAHIM and MOHAMAD FAHIM ABED; Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting.
Photograph
Afghan Security Personnel Milled Around the Wreckage of Buses That Were Bombed Thursday with Police Cadets On Board. (Photograph by Shah Marai/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 605
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 1, 2016"
