"KABUL, Afghanistan -- With nearly 2,000 civilians killed or wounded and more than 80,000 people displaced this year already, the Afghan conflict continues to affect lives in record numbers, the United Nations said on Sunday.
The report came as fighting raged across several provinces. For a third day, government forces repelled Taliban attacks across several districts of Kunduz and were trying to prevent the insurgents from taking the provincial capital, as they did in the fall.
The United Nations mission in Afghanistan documented 600 civilian deaths and 1,343 wounded in the first three months of 2016, which by most accounts is expected to be a bloody year as the Taliban rejected the latest efforts to bring them to peace talks. While the death toll fell 13 percent from the same period last year, the number of wounded increased 11 percent, the report said, with a high rise among children.
\"In the first quarter of 2016, almost one-third of civilian casualties were children,\" said Danielle Bell, the United Nations human rights director in Afghanistan. \"If the fighting persists near schools, playgrounds, homes and clinics, and parties continue to use explosive weapons in those areas -- particularly mortars and I.E.D. tactics -- these appalling numbers of children killed and maimed will continue.\"
The report blamed the insurgents for 60 percent of the casualties, and forces on the government side for 19 percent.
Though the Taliban were still at fault more often, the report noted that deaths caused by pro-government forces were up sharply from last year -- roughly 70 percent higher over the same period. The deaths caused by government forces, put at 127 over the first three months of this year, were mostly caused by explosive weapons, including mortars, rockets and grenades, the report said.
The United Nations also expressed concern at the increase of civilian casualties in airstrikes by the Afghan government and the United States-led NATO coalition.
The spread of fighting also continues to displace people at record levels, with 81,445 individuals forced from their homes in the first three months of the year, according to figures from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
The agency recorded internal displacement caused by violence across 23 of Afghanistan's 34 provinces in the first quarter of 2016. The northeastern province of Baghlan, where Taliban attacks have increased, was at the top of the chart, with 25,000 people displaced. A combined total of more than 20,000 people were displaced in the southern provinces of Oruzgan and Helmand.
In Kunduz, where over 6,000 people have been displaced this year, officials on Sunday reported continued fighting across at least four districts surrounding the provincial capital, Kunduz City. Six dead bodies and 109 people who were wounded, almost all of them civilians, had been taken to Kunduz hospitals in the past two days, said Sayed Mukhtar, the province's director of health.
After initial panic on Friday that the insurgents were at the city gates again, the threat now seemed contained, officials said.
Gen. Qasim Jangalbagh, the province's police chief, said the city's eastern gate had not seen any attacks since the insurgent commander there and six fighters were killed Saturday night.
Credit: MUJIB MASHAL; Najim Rahim contributed reporting from Kunduz, Afghanistan.
Word count: 550
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 18, 2016"
