"As the Islamic State burst into the international spotlight in 2014, claiming a wide swath of territory in Syria and Iraq and spreading its message through a stream of bloody propaganda videos over the Internet, a young man from the Bronx watched with increasing admiration, according to law enforcement officials.
Twice in less than two months that fall, the man, Sajmir Alimehmeti, tried without success to enter Britain, according to a federal complaint unsealed in Manhattan on Tuesday. The first time, he was found carrying camouflage pants and shirts, and a pair of nunchucks tucked away in his bag at the airport in Manchester. He was denied entry, the complaint says.
The second time, he was stopped at Heathrow Airport in London. When the British authorities looked at his cellphone and computer, they found photos of the Islamic State flag and the group's attacks, according to the complaint, and he was again sent back to the United States.
After he grew frustrated with his own attempts to join the Islamic State, according to the authorities, he tried to help another man who said he was looking to fight for the terrorist group, unaware that the man was an undercover federal law enforcement employee.
Mr. Alimehmeti, 22, was arrested on Tuesday on charges of providing material support to a terrorist organization and passport fraud, and was ordered held without bond by a magistrate judge, Gabriel W. Gorenstein, of Federal District Court.
A prosecutor, Brendan Quigley, had argued in court that Mr. Alimehmeti posed a significant flight risk and danger to the community, saying he had \"repeatedly demonstrated his support\" for the Islamic State.
Mr. Alimehmeti's lawyer, Sylvie Levine, had asked that her client be released on $200,000 bond with restrictions like home confinement. She argued that none of his statements \"appeared to be followed by any act.\"
If convicted, Mr. Alimehmeti could face up to 20 years in prison on the material support charge and up to 10 years on the passport fraud count.
Mr. Alimehmeti's neighbors, who said he had become more religious in recent years, were stunned by the news of the arrest.
Luis Rodriguez, 21, who lived down the hall from Mr. Alimehmeti, said that when the two first met, Mr. Alimehmeti wore American style clothes. Mr. Rodriguez would lend him video games like \"Call of Duty,\" and he said they were friendly.
But in 2013, Mr. Alimehmeti disappeared for a time. Mr. Rodriguez said he thought perhaps he had traveled to Albania, where his brother lived. (According to the complaint, Mr. Alimehmeti's brother was arrested on weapons and assault charges there in 2015.)
When he returned, he was different, Mr. Rodriguez said.
\"He got calmer,\" he said. \"He started working and saying he was going to school. I didn't see him outside as much.\"
Nearly 100 people have been charged in the United States with supporting the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and Mr. Alimehmeti's case -- both in the ways that it differs from the others and in the ways that it fits into a broader pattern -- highlights the ever-evolving efforts by law enforcement agencies to combat a threat that is also changing.
When ISIS first rose to the top of the threat list, many of the court cases cited people for trying to go overseas to fight for the group.
But by spring 2015, the cases shifted, with most involving people who were believed to pose a direct threat of attack in the United States -- an emphasis that has only increased since the ISIS-inspired attacks in Paris, Brussels and San Bernardino, Calif.
James B. Comey, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, has said there are about 900 open inquiries related to support for the Islamic State across the country.
Diego Rodriguez, the assistant director in charge of the F.B.I.'s New York office, said that Mr. Alimehmeti \"was allegedly having a hard time getting overseas to fight\" with the Islamic State. \"But when he couldn't leave, he allegedly seemed more than willing to help others tread the same path to join an insidious and deadly terrorist organization,\" Mr. Rodriguez added.
Karen J. Greenberg, the executive director of the Center on National Security at the Fordham University School of Law, said Mr. Alimehmeti's desire to fight abroad was intriguing because it raised the question of whether the group's call for recruits was still resonating.
\"This case, in its details, reinforces the trend in ISIS cases: the preference for weapons other than explosives, the importance of social media, the virulence of ISIS videos, a new trend in efforts to avoid detection online and the youth of these individuals in the United States,\" she said. \"In 2014, this individual was 20, the most frequent age among those indicted on ISIS-related charges in the U.S.\"
Mr. Alimehmeti repeatedly showed his support for the organization, the complaint says, citing materials found on his laptop and cellphone when he tried to enter Britain in December 2014, as well as secretly recorded statements he made.
His laptop, for example, contained audio files of jihad and martyrdom lectures, including some delivered by Anwar al-Awlaki, the American imam who became the leading English-language propagandist for Al Qaeda's affiliate in Yemen before he was killed in a United States drone strike in 2011.
Ms. Greenberg noted that Osama bin Laden is rarely mentioned as a source of inspiration anymore. Mr. Awlaki's message, however, continues to resonate.
Since summer 2015, Mr. Alimehmeti began buying military-style knives and equipment like handcuffs and gloves with steel knuckles, according to the complaint.
Beginning in fall 2015, he also began meeting with undercover law enforcement employees who were posing as like-minded sympathizers of the Islamic State. One met repeatedly with Mr. Alimehmeti at his Bronx apartment, where Mr. Alimehmeti displayed the ISIS flag and played ISIS videos on his computer and phone, the complaint says.
About two weeks ago, Mr. Alimehmeti was told that another purported Islamic State supporter he had met had left the United States to join the group.
Mr. Alimehmeti said he was \"jealous\" of the man and hoped he would introduce him to his connections, the complaint says.
During that meeting, on May 9, Mr. Alimehmeti also played two ISIS-produced music videos, one of which showed the group's fighters decapitating prisoners, according to the complaint, which says that Mr. Alimehmeti claimed the videos \"keep him motivated while he is exercising.\"
Last week, the complaint says, Mr. Alimehmeti said he wanted to go to Raqqah, the Islamic State's de facto capital in northern Syria, because it was the \"heart\" of its operations.
The next day, Mr. Alimehmeti was also introduced to a third undercover employee, who posed as a would-be ISIS fighter who had just arrived in New York by bus and would be flying from Kennedy International Airport that evening to join the organization.
Mr. Alimehmeti helped the purported Islamic State supporter buy supplies, according to the complaint, including boots and a cellphone, and advised him on the use of an encryption app, cautioning him that even when using it, \"don't say things straight up.\"
Credit: MARC SANTORA and BENJAMIN WEISER; Emily Palmer and Remy Tumin contributed reporting, and Susan C. Beachy contributed research.
Photograph
Sajmir Alimehmeti, 22, Who Was Arrested On Tuesday. (Photograph by Justice Department)
Word count: 1237
Copyright New York Times Company May 25, 2016"
