"MANILA -- President Rodrigo Duterte declared a \"state of lawlessness\" on Saturday after a powerful blast ripped through a crowded night market in the city of Davao on Friday, killing at least 14 people and wounding more than 60.
Mr. Duterte said he was giving the military additional powers to carry out some police operations, like patrolling in urban areas and setting up checkpoints.
\"I am declaring now a state of lawlessness,\" Mr. Duterte said after visiting the scene of the blast on Saturday. \"It is not martial law. It has nothing to do with the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus.\"
Martin Andanar, the presidential communications secretary, said later that the declaration covered the entire nation, not just the southern Mindanao region, where the explosion occurred.
The extremist group Abu Sayyaf claimed responsibility for the blast, according to The Associated Press, but Mr. Duterte said investigators were also looking at other possible suspects, including drug syndicates.
\"There is a crisis in this country involving drugs, extrajudicial killings, and there seems to be an environment of lawlessness, lawless violence,\" Mr. Duterte said. The country is facing \"extraordinary times\" that require strong measures, he added.
The explosion took place at a market near a hotel frequented by the president, whose hometown is Davao. Mr. Duterte was the city's mayor for nearly two decades before becoming the leader of the Philippines in July. His contentious anticrime and antidrug policies have led to the deaths of hundreds of people and accusations of human rights violations and vigilantism.
Mr. Duterte was in Davao on Friday night, his son, Paolo Duterte, the city's vice mayor, told Reuters. Earlier on Friday, Mr. Andanar said there had been a report of an assassination plot against President Duterte.
\"These reported assassination plots are being closely investigated by the presidential security group even as the president receives threats every day,\" Mr. Andanar said.
The blast occurred as the country's security forces were on heightened alert for any retaliatory attacks from Abu Sayyaf, the subject of a military operation involving up to 9,000 troops on the island of Jolo, on the southern tip of the country and far from Davao.
This week, gunmen killed 15 soldiers in a series of clashes on Jolo, where Abu Sayyaf is believed to be holding at least 23 hostages, including a Dutch bird-watcher kidnapped in 2012 and a Norwegian abducted last year from a beach resort he helped manage.
>
Mr. Andanar said on local television on Saturday that police officers investigating the Davao blast had found what appeared to be \"fragments\" from the kind of explosive devices typically used by Abu Sayyaf militants in their attacks. But he stressed that the investigation had just gotten underway.
Vice Mayor Duterte said Friday that he had received intelligence reports indicating that attacks could occur in the city or other urban areas in the south. He did not elaborate.
Dionardo Carlos, a senior superintendent and a spokesman for the national police, said Saturday that police departments all over the country had been ordered to be on full alert.
Word count: 524
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 3, 2016"
