"Five separate times during a short car ride with the two men he thought were his confederates, James Medina left little doubt about his resolve to bomb a south Florida synagogue as a bloody expression of his support for the Islamic State.
\"You know,\" the 40-year-old Hollywood, Fla., man allegedly said earlier this year. \"It's my call of duty. And whatever happens, it's for the glory of Allah!\"
The subsequent criminal complaint outlined a now-familiar plot line in which government informant and undercover agent infiltrate an alleged criminal network and win the confidence of a suspected terrorist whose journey now ends more often than not in shackles.
Sting operations always have been a staple of FBI criminal investigations, dating to the federal government's earliest infiltration of the mafia and other organized crime networks. But its broad and controversial application in terror inquiries is the manifestation of a daunting directive issued in the aftermath of 9/11 attacks and a reflection of the evolving threat.
Pondering the very existence of the FBI in the post-2001 world, the 9/11 Commission, created by Congress in the aftermath of the catastrophic assaults, urged the bureau to find its way into the then-unfamiliar culture of a new enemy embracing radical Islam that continues to represent an unparalleled threat.
\"The FBI needs to be able to direct its thousands of agents and other employees to collect intelligence in America's cities and towns -- interviewing informants, conducting surveillance and searches, tracking individuals,\" the panel recommended in its 2004 report.
\"The FBI's job in the streets of the United States would thus be a domestic equivalent, operating under the U.S. Constitution and quite different laws and rules, to the job of the CIA's operations officers abroad.\"
More than 12 years after the commission's highly critical report was issued, panel chairman Tom Kean said the aggressive use of informants in a steady stream of terror cases since -- from the FBI's early post-9/11 inquiries involving al-Qaeda operatives to the dozens of more recent stings involving U.S. recruits to the cause of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL -- represent the bureau's continuing transformation to the intelligence-driven agency envisioned by the commission.
Indeed, FBI Director James Comey has frequently referred in recent months to the volume of potential terror cases -- there are about 1,000 open investigations into potential terror operatives and violent extremists -- that now occupy every field office in the country. During the next five years at least, Comey said Thursday during a panel discussion involving the nation's top intelligence officials, that that even more extensive use of \"sources and undercovers\" will be required to meet investigative challenges posed by digital encryption and the \"hundreds of hardened fighters\" who likely will stream from the \"crush of the (ISIL) caliphate\" in Syria.
The transformation of the FBI that began shortly after 9/11 was not only required to meet the new terror threat but necessary for the agency's very survival.
John Pistole, a former FBI deputy director who helped oversee critical aspects of the bureau's shift from an after-the-fact investigative agency to an agency capable of thwarting future attacks, described the anxious weeks and months after 9/11 in which agents sought to head off new threats while then-director Robert Mueller fought to keep the bureau from being dissembled by members of Congress into something resembling the British MI5 intelligence service.
\"There was a view that the bureau had failed significantly when it came to terrorism,\" said Pistole, who went on to head the Transportation Security Administration, an arm of the Department of Homeland Security created following 9/11.
For defense lawyers and civil rights advocates who have been closely monitoring the FBI's counterterrorism activities, the aggressive tactics have raised separate concerns about the possible entrapment of suspects whose willingness or ability to carry out alleged plots may not have been possible without the FBI's involvement.
In federal court documents outlining the case against the suspected Florida synagogue plotter, authorities said Medina, 40, repeatedly affirmed his alleged commitment to launch an attack against the synagogue in Aventura, Fla., to coincide with Yom Kippur.
There were discussions about the use of AK-47s and an explosive device, which an undercover agent ultimately agreed to provide. Nine days before the alleged attack was to be launched, the undercover agent once again sought to gauge Medina's commitment to the plan.
\"You need to be sure, brother,\" the agent said.
\"I'm pretty sure,\" Medina said at one point. \"I think so; I believe so. I'm ready, bro!\"
While the case remains pending, a federal judge earlier this month ordered the government to perform a mental evaluation of the suspect after an neuropsychologist's review arranged by Medina's defense team found that he was \"not competent.\"
Credit: Kevin Johnson, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Charles Dharapak, AP
Word count: 837
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
