"For the past week, I've felt the anxiety. A dull, gnawing tension is palpable while driving or walking in Turkey's capital, where armed police, some wearing black ski masks and heavy body armor with automatic weapons, set up roadblocks to pull over and search cars and passengers.
Security has been the main topic in local newspapers, on Twitter and Facebook and in countless warnings from embassies shared from friend to friend in a virtual conga line across neighborhoods and even cities.
A week ago, a suicide bombing in central Ankara killed 37 people and injured more than 170. This weekend another suicide bomb in Istanbul's most well-known neighborhood killed five, including the bomber. On Sunday, the Istanbul governor's office postponed a soccer match because of an unspecified threat.
\"There are lots of rumors everywhere,\" said Pinar Aydin, 25, a computer programmer who lives near the site of Ankara's recent bomb blast. \"Don't take buses, stay away from embassies and military places. But I have to take the bus to work. People next to me talk all the time about the next attack.\"
There is a surreal aspect to living in a city where you are told to expect bomb attacks. This past weekend, in particular, Turkish security as well as embassies and United Nations missions here warned that violence from terrorists could escalate to coincide with Sunday's start of Nowruz, the Kurdish and Persian New Year.
In Turkey, Nowruz is associated with the recognition of Kurdish identity and resistance. In this region of complex geopolitics, tension is at a breaking point between Kurdish groups in Turkey and the government. A 2-year-old cease-fire between Turkey and the outlawed Kurdish Worker's Party (PKK) broke down last summer. Since then in Turkey's southeast, more than 340 members of Turkey's security forces have been killed, along with 300 PKK fighters and more than 200 civilians. The military recently began a new offensive against several Kurdish towns.
Tension ramped up just before the weekend when the German Embassy and German school in Ankara, plus its consulate and school in Istanbul, announced they were closing because of the threat of an attack. Soon after, the German Embassy began a voluntary evacuation of its nationals. Saturday's suicide bombing on Istanbul's Istiklal Street was not far from the German Consulate. Rumors swirled like wind-whipped brush fires. Some Turkish schools closed and canceled all weekend activities.
Ankara is a government city with ministries and embassies spread up and down its many steep hills. I am used to the prominent police presence and, like London, this is a city with ubiquitous closed-circuit security cameras. These cameras have helped identify the suicide bombers in the October blast that killed more than 100, the February blast that killed 29 and the most recent suicide bombing, by a 24-year-old Kurdish woman, on March 13.
A terror group linked to the PKK, the Kurdistan Freedom Hawks, claimed responsibility for both the February and March attacks in Ankara. The group said the attacks were revenge for the government military operations in the southeast.
Even the many parks now flush with blooming white and pink cherry trees are being patrolled by security personnel. Though the U.S. Embassy said there were no specific threats, the alert level at Turkey's Incirlik Air Base, which has a large U.S. military presence, was recently raised to its highest level.
The American school on the military base in Adana is temporarily closed, and Americans there are for the moment on lockdown in their homes. Last week, as I drove on the highway that connects Ankara to its eastern borders with Iraq and Syria, cars and trucks were being pulled over at heavily armed police checkpoints.
In Ankara, a city beset by a lingering fear, many people stayed close to home this weekend. Meltem Cubukcu, said her daughters, ages 10 and 14, are so shaken that they were staying home from school. \"My oldest daughter is a teenager,\" Cubukcu said. \"Sometimes she doesn't answer her phone. I don't want her to be away from me. I am so scared.\"
Lorch, a former New York Times foreign correspondent, is a writer based in Ankara.
Illustration
photo Tolga Bozoglu, European Pressphoto Agency
Word count: 730
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
