"The White House has authorized sending an additional 600 troops to Iraq to help train and advise Iraqi forces as they prepare to retake the critical city of Mosul from Islamic State militants this fall, the Pentagon said Wednesday.
The increase would raise the authorized number of American troops in Iraq to at least 5,000.
\"The coalition will continue to increase the pressure on ISIL in Mosul and wherever it seeks refuge in Iraq,\" Defense Secretary Ash Carter said in a statement, using an acronym for the Islamic State.
He said the troops would provide logistics and maintenance support in addition to training and advising Iraq's military forces.
The White House has said the troops in Iraq are not combat forces, but are there to aid Iraq's military, which is taking the lead in the ground fight against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.
Still, American advisers are authorized to accompany Iraqi troops at battalion headquarters, which can expose them to fighting. \"American forces combating ISIL in Iraq are in harm's way,\" Carter said Wednesday. \"No one should be in any doubt about that.\"
Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, was captured by the Islamic State in 2014. The Iraqi military has been ousting the militants from other Iraqi cities, but Mosul is the largest remaining Islamic State stronghold in the country.
The offensive into Mosul will be the most significant test yet for Iraq's military, involving thousands of Iraqi and Kurdish forces backed by U.S.-led coalition airstrikes.
The Iraqi forces will face thousands of militants who have had more than two years to build elaborate defenses around the city. Islamic State militants have planted roadside bombs, built tunnels and have even created a moat filled with oil that can be set ablaze, according to the Pentagon.
\"They've built a hell on earth around themselves,\" Air Force Col. John Dorrian, a U.S. military spokesman in Baghdad, said recently.
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi has said he wanted to have the offensive underway before the end of the year. The Pentagon has said the decision for when to launch the operation is up to him.
Iraqi forces have seized territory around the city, including an air base that will serve as a staging area for the final assault, in an effort to isolate the city and make it difficult for militants to get supplies and reinforcements into the area.
Expelling the militants from the center of Mosul will mean Iraq's newly trained and fitted armed forces will face difficult street fighting in a sprawling city with hundreds of thousands of civilians still living there.
In previous battles, militants have used civilians in an effort to shield them from coalition airstrikes.
Credit: Jim Michaels, @jimmichaels, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Ahamd Al-Rubaye, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 494
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
