"Many expressed some form of social alienation, loneliness or identity issues, according to evidence presented in legal documents and other public information analyzed by the center. \"These individuals seemed to be looking to attach to something that can help define them as well as give them a cause worth fighting for,\" said Karen J. Greenberg, the director of the center. More than three-quarters were motivated by dissatisfaction with American society, and at least half expressed resentment over the oppression of Muslims worldwide. Most were caught before hurting anyone, but three of them -- the attackers in San Bernardino, Calif., and Orlando, Fla. -- killed more than 60 people combined. While the majority of the suspected perpetrators were United States citizens, more than half had been naturalized or had at least one foreign-born parent, the center found. Sarah Lyons-Padilla, a Stanford social psychology expert who has studied the effects of anti-Muslim attitudes, said discrimination against first- or second-generation Muslims could be particularly harmful for those who felt a kind of \"cultural homelessness.\" This, in turn, she said, \"is related to greater support for radicalism.\" At least a quarter of them expressed a desire for martyrdom. Some were seeking religious attachment and converted to Islam. Almost all were attracted to the idea of serving the \"larger purpose of the caliphate,\" the report said. Nader Elhuzayel and Muhanad Badawi, 25-year-old men from Anaheim, Calif., who were convicted of trying to become fighters for the Islamic State, discussed \"how it would be a blessing to fight for the cause of Allah and to die in the battlefield,\" according to the United States attorney's office there. Many were strongly influenced by Baghdadi or Awlaki. The cases include frequent references to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State, and Anwar al-Awlaki, an American-born radical Muslim cleric who was the leading English-language propagandist for Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula before being killed in an American drone strike in Yemen. At least 23 people pledged allegiance to Mr. Baghdadi. Many lived with their parents, some of whom tried to intervene. The average age of those accused was 26, and many still lived at home with their parents. In several cases, parents tried to prevent their children from going to fight for the Islamic State in Iraq or Syria, or from identifying with the group at all. In one case, a young Texas man, Asher Abid Khan, traveled to Turkey to join the Islamic State but returned home after his family sent him false information that his mother was sick. Many used social media to become involved with the Islamic State. Twitter, Facebook and other social media platforms played a large role in their recruitment and expressions of support for the Islamic State. Nearly every case involved some form of internet communication. At least 29 came to the attention of the authorities through social media. Some of them sought links to ISIS through marriage. Several Americans seemed to be enticed by the promise of marriage. Shannon Conley, a 19-year-old woman from a suburb of Denver, thought she was going to marry a Tunisian recruiter for the Islamic State whom she had met online. Khalil Abu Rayyan, a Michigan man, wanted to marry who he thought was a Muslim woman he met online, but who turned out to be an undercover F.B.I. agent.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Photograph
Charts: U.S. Citizens; Permanent Residents, Refugees or Other (Sources: Karen J. Greenberg, Seth Weiner, Joshua Brandman and Carly Millenson at the Center On National Security; Justice Department; Stanford University)
Word count: 623
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 8, 2016"
