"KABUL, Afghanistan -- Col. Ahmad Salangi, 47, had flourished in the new Afghan national police force, rising to become the deputy commander of one of the most important security districts in the capital.
He rushed to the scene on Monday afternoon to help direct the response after a bomb exploded outside the Defense Ministry in Kabul, and was among the dozens killed when another Taliban attacker detonated a bomb in the crowd.
The Taliban clearly calibrated the double bombing to catch senior figures like Colonel Salangi. Among the 40 or so fatalities were at least two generals, several colonels and many soldiers and police officers.
But there were also poor street vendors and other civilians, killed because they happened to be in an area that is at once the perimeter of power, close to the Afghan Defense Ministry and presidential palace, and the site of a crowded market for fresh vegetables, money exchangers and secondhand shoes.
Hospital workers raced to identify the dead and tend to the 110 wounded. On the street, firefighters washed the mingled blood of generals and hawkers into the muddy stream of the Kabul River, its waters so often dyed red in just this way.
The day's toll would not stop there. By morning, Colonel Salangi's mother, Bibi Amina, would be counted among the dead, too, killed by a stroke after she accidentally heard the news her family was trying to keep from her.
For Kabul itself, there was only a short break from the siege. The security forces and emergency responders would be tested again after a large car bomb exploded before midnight in front of the compound of CARE International, a humanitarian aid organization.
Gunmen -- the police said there were three, while security guards put the tally at six -- stormed the fortified building and fought for about 11 hours. The last of them was shot around 10 a.m. on Tuesday.
\"The three terrorists were killed,\" said Sediq Sediqqi, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry. \"Police special forces rescued 42 civilians, including 10 foreign citizens.\"
Mr. Sediqqi said preliminary information suggested that no one had been killed but the attackers, with six people wounded.
The rescues stood out as a small bit of good news on another bad day for Afghan forces, who are being killed in record numbers this year. Gen. John W. Nicholson, the commander of NATO and United States forces here, said that in July alone, the Afghan forces suffered about 900 deaths.
Those are losses not just to the country's security, but also to families like Colonel Salangi's.
He was one of six brothers raised in Parwan Province, two of whom died before him: One was killed in the 1990s resistance against the Taliban in the north, while another died of cancer in recent years. Those two men were fathers to 14 children, whose care fell to the extended family.
Colonel Salangi's success made him crucial to all their welfare. After coming up through the ranks of the Afghan National Police, he rose to become deputy police chief of Precinct 1, entrusted with the security of some of the government's most important institutions.
In the hours after the colonel's death, his family back in Parwan, in the north, debated how to handle it. Even as his body was being transported for burial in his ancestral home, they decided to tell Ms. Amina, his elderly mother, that he had been wounded and was being flown to India for treatment.
But after midnight, a distant relative who had gotten the news separately came running into the house.
\"He was screaming that Commander Ahmad is not among us anymore, he is martyred,\" said Abdul Zahir Salangi, a member of the Parwan provincial council and a close friend of the colonel's. \"Ahmad's mother got out of her room, and she asked him, 'What happened to Ahmad?' The relatives hugged her and told her that we lost him. She collapsed.\"
Ms. Amina was rushed to the hospital. Half an hour later, the doctors declared her dead.
In the morning, hundreds of men lined up in Parwan for a final prayer before she and her son were buried together. Colonel Salangi leaves behind 12 children and two wives.
Back in Kabul, the police declared the siege on the CARE compound over. Some observers, including CARE itself in a statement, suggested that the organization had not been the intended target, and that the militants had either ended up there in confusion or sought to use it as a jumping-off point in an assault on a compound next door. That lot is home to a charity run by Rahmatullah Nabil, a former Afghan intelligence chief and a public anti-Taliban voice, to help the families of wounded and killed Afghan forces.
After claiming responsibility for the double bombing earlier, the Taliban also took credit for the midnight attack. But the insurgents did not provide details on their intended target.
The mood in Kabul remained grim for much of Tuesday, and the roads to the city center were blocked during the morning rush until the security operation was declared over.
The CARE compound is in a busy commercial part of downtown Kabul, behind a row of shopping malls. The huge car bombing at the start of the attack cratered the asphalt road and broke windows in buildings throughout the neighborhood.
By afternoon, shopkeepers were still busy sweeping broken glass and debris from their stores. Some were welding the windows and replacing the glass, others erecting new gates. Two restaurants near the scene, their window frames empty, continued to serve guests.
At the site of the Defense Ministry attack, Azizullah, a street-side barber, was back to clipping hair -- with his right hand only. He had suffered shrapnel wounds in his left arm from the explosion.
\"I went to the Istiqlal Hospital, and the doctors told me shrapnel was still in my arm,\" he said. \"They told me I should go to Wazir Akhbar Khan Hospital to remove it.\"
But with the peak days of the Muslim festival of Eid ahead, Azizullah, 65, decided he could not afford the operation now.
\"I am working for couple days,\" he said, \"and then I will go to the hospital for treatment.\"
Credit: MUJIB MASHAL, ZAHRA NADER and FAHIM ABED; Fahim Abed contributed reporting.
Photograph
Afghan Security Personnel On Tuesday After a Car-Bomb Attack at the Compound of Care International, a Humanitarian Aid Organization. (Photograph by Wakil Kohsar/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images); Shattered Windows On Tuesday in Kabul, Where a Series of Deadly Attacks Claimed Dozens. Right, a Police Officer at the Scene of One of the Attacks. (Photographs by Rahmat Gul/Associated Press; Mohammad Ismail/Reuters)
Word count: 1132
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 7, 2016"
