"YouTube has transformed how individuals access video content. Its intuitive programming leads an individual searching for one specific Adele song or performance to a dizzying variety of other Adele material -- turning a quick search into a YouTube binge on all things Adele.
YouTube has also changed how individuals interact with less innocuous content as well. Take Anwar al-Awlaki, the American cleric turned al-Qaeda propagandist. Because of al-Awlaki's homicidal anti-American agenda, the Obama administration concluded that his words were too dangerous for al-Awlaki himself to live.
Yet it is just as easy to find al-Awlaki calls to jihad on a YouTube binge as it is to find the latest music videos. Al-Awlaki's online presence continues to thrive due in part to the technology of American companies like YouTube, owned by Google.
Algorithms
If a curious individual searches for an al-Awlaki sermon online, YouTube will present a catalog of works that quickly leads from deceptively benign theological-based musings to calls for terrorist violence after only three or four videos. Unlike other YouTube experiences, this one lures viewers from non-violent material into the deepest crevices of al-Qaeda propaganda, unintentionally propelled by YouTube's algorithms.
For years, al-Awlaki's lectures -- some overtly inciting to violence, others from his ostensibly non-violent period -- have been readily available on YouTube, garnering hundreds of thousands of views and a long blue bar of \"likes.\"
Meanwhile, the late al-Qaeda operative is responsible for inspiring and developing such well-known terrorists as the underwear bomber, the Fort Hood shooter, the Boston Marathon bombers and, most recently, San Bernardino shooter Syed Farook.
A study by the Counter Extremism Project revealed the enduring extent of al-Awlaki's reach: In 2015, roughly a fourth of Americans linked to al-Qaeda and the Islamic State group were substantially influenced by the extremist cleric. That was four years after his death by a drone strike in 2011.
Al-Awlaki's presence on YouTube -- where a recent search using his name turned up more than 70,000 results -- is particularly insidious. Today, as al-Awlaki continues to spew diatribes from beyond the grave, it is unacceptable that his voice is being memorialized, consumed and shared -- and thereby inadvertently legitimized -- through a prominent U.S.-based company.
Radicalization pipeline
As a result of autoplay -- which queues related content to start immediately after a video ends -- a viewer who clicks on al-Awlaki's \"Tour of Jannah Paradise\" will -- four videos later -- be lured to the anti-American \"Battle of the Hearts and Minds.\" Though not by design, YouTube's autoplay feature in this context serves as a radicalization pipeline.
Another YouTube feature that contributes to radicalization online is autofill. With autofill, YouTube's search engine guesses what a viewer is looking for based on similar search terms. When someone types \"Anwar al-Awlaki,\" YouTube suggests that users search for \"Anwar al-Awlaki jihad\" or \"Anwar al-Awlaki death video,\" again guiding users to the more extremist elements of al-Awlaki's vast collection.
Keeping in mind the continuing appeal of violence tied to al-Awlaki continues to have, YouTube should immediately cease hosting his content, including the material from earlier in his career that inappropriately legitimizes him. Such material only serves to enhance al-Awlaki's standing as a theologian, when in fact his ideology and religious interpretations do not represent the peaceful teachings of Islam.
In the meantime, as YouTube considers my Jan. 8 request to remove content associated with al-Awlaki, it should take immediate action to modify its autofill and autoplay settings.
This would not be unprecedented. YouTube already heavily regulates its content, removing pornography and copyrighted material. The company also makes searching for such material particularly difficult, tailoring its autofill options to avoid suggesting obscenities and sexually explicit content.
Of course, al-Awlaki's presence cannot be erased from social media. The propagandist has already left his stain on the world, inspiring the murders of dozens of Americans. But a man whom President Obama ordered killed for his dangerous speech should not be allowed free rein online, boosted by YouTube's technological expertise.
Mark D. Wallace served as ambassador to the United Nations in the George W. Bush administration. He is CEO of the non-profit Counter Extremism Project.
Word count: 715
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
