"Law enforcement officers deserve our praise for tracking down jihad bomber Ahmad Rahami so quickly. But their job is to look for perps after they commit a crime.
The goal for policymakers should be to try to prevent such attacks from happening in the first place. Tighter immigration policies are essential to that end. The first line of the 9/11 Commission staff report on immigration makes this clear: \"It is perhaps obvious to state that terrorists cannot plan and carry out attacks in the United States if they are unable to enter the country.\"
The authorities were told that Rahami was a potential threat, but their investigation yielded nothing they could act on. This was also true of the Orlando and Boston Marathon jihadists as well. There's just no way to know which of the militant Islamists we let in to our country will actually follow through with violence.
And even if we did, there aren't enough police in the world to watch them all. Last year, it was reported that the FBI's intensive tracking of just 48 terror suspects was \"almost overwhelming.\" We're expecting too much of law enforcement if we think they can cope with the admission of large numbers of potential killers.
A prudent immigration policy would err on the side of caution. Immigration from countries suffering from widespread jihadist violence should generally not be permitted. Our officials do the best job they can, but there is literally no way to adequately vet people from places such as Somalia or Afghanistan.
Refugees, in particular, should not be resettled in the United States except in the most unusual circumstances; we can help 12 times as many people abroad for the same money, and keep potential security threats off shore.
And since many terrorists have come here as children, like Rahami, screening the adults for retrograde values -- what Donald Trump called \"extreme vetting\" -- is essential to try to prevent the growth of new terrorists on our soil.
In a globalized world, a loose immigration system is a threat to our country's safety. National security is not possible without immigration security.
Mark Krikorian is executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies.
Word count: 383
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
