"PARIS -- The French Parliament on Thursday approved a new two-month extension of the state of emergency that was initially declared in the aftermath of the Nov. 13 attacks in and around Paris.
The extension will cover two major sporting events taking place this summer in France -- the Euro 2016 soccer tournament and the Tour de France cycling race. The events have prompted fear of additional terrorist attacks in a country still on high alert.
Forty-six lawmakers in the National Assembly, the lower house of Parliament, voted in favor of the new extension, with 20 against it. The Senate, the upper house, already approved the extension on May 10.
Patrick Calvar, the director of France's domestic intelligence agency, told a parliamentary committee on that same day that the Islamic State was \"planning new attacks\" and that the country could be assaulted by multiple bombings in crowded areas to create panic.
France is \"clearly the most threatened country,\" Mr. Calvar said, pointing to threats from the Islamic State and Al Qaeda.
The French authorities are particularly worried about security at the Euro 2016 soccer tournament, which runs from June 10 to July 10, and at the Tour de France, from July 2 to July 24.
Both are expected to draw large crowds, especially in cities hosting the soccer tournament, which will provide so-called fan zones where hundreds of spectators can gather to watch matches on large screens.
Speaking earlier on Thursday on RTL radio, Prime Minister Manuel Valls said that the tournament would not be canceled, despite the security concerns, and that the fan zones would be adequately protected.
The state of emergency had already been extended twice, for three-month periods, and was scheduled to end on May 26. The new extension is expected to be the last.
President François Hollande declared the state of emergency on Nov. 14, 2015, a day after coordinated teams of Islamic State militants killed 130 people and wounded more than 400 at a concert hall and in cafes and restaurants in central Paris, and outside a soccer stadium in St.-Denis, north of the capital.
A parliamentary report published on Tuesday noted that while the state of emergency had proved \"very useful\" in the immediate aftermath of the attacks, several of its measures \"no longer present the same interest today.\"
The state of emergency had enabled the authorities to put people under house arrest and to carry out police raids without the prior authorization of a judge. Sixty-nine people are currently under house arrest, the report said, and more than 3,500 raids have been carried out since Nov. 14.
But the vast majority of those raids were carried out in the first three months of the state of emergency, the report said.
The government, acknowledging a diminished need for those kinds of raids, left that option out of the new extension. Instead, it will focus on other law-enforcement powers granted by the state of emergency to local authorities. Those include banning demonstrations and forbidding the access and movement of people and vehicles in specific areas at specific times.
\"The terrorist threat remains at a high level,\" Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve told lawmakers before the vote on Thursday. \"France, like the European Union, represents a target.\"
Photograph
President FrançOis Hollande Declared a State of Emergency in France On Nov. 14, 2015. (Photograph by Gonzalo Fuentes/A.F.P. -- Getty Images)
Word count: 582
Copyright New York Times Company May 20, 2016"
