"MOSCOW -- The Russian military said on Wednesday that its warplanes had carried out a strike in Syria that killed up to 40 Islamic State militants, including Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the group's senior strategist and spokesman who was heavily involved in planning attacks overseas.
The Russian announcement appeared to be a direct challenge to an American claim made a day earlier that one of its drone strikes had killed the same senior figure. Pentagon officials dismissed Russia's claim.
Russia has faced widespread criticism from the West that its nearly year-old military intervention in Syria was undertaken more to prop up President Bashar al-Assad of Syria than to fulfill the Kremlin's stated goal of fighting terrorism. This is the first public announcement that it had killed a specific senior figure from the militant group.
Russia's Defense Ministry said in a statement that Mr. Adnani, 39, had been killed on Tuesday after a Russian Su-34 bombed an area near the Syrian city of Aleppo, and that his death had been confirmed \"through several intelligence channels.\"
The Defense Ministry's claim was applauded by analysts and lawmakers sympathetic to the Kremlin as a landmark in the country's Syria campaign.
\"I think this was a sniper shot and really a serious success,\" the head of the State Duma's Defense Committee, Vladimir Komoyedov, told the Interfax news agency.
On Tuesday, the Islamic State issued a statement acknowledging Mr. Adnani's death, but did not say who had killed him. The group's Amaq news agency said Mr. Adnani had been \"martyred while surveying the operations to repel the military campaigns against Aleppo.\"
In Washington, the Pentagon issued a statement on Tuesday saying that Mr. Adnani had been killed in an American \"precision strike\" near Al Bab, Syria. The Russian statement said that the airstrike had been carried out near the village of Maarat Umm Hawsh, about 16 miles from Al Bab.
\"We are still assessing the results of the strike, but Mr. Adnani's removal from the battlefield would mark another significant blow\" to the Islamic State, said the Pentagon's spokesman, Peter Cook.
Credit: IVAN NECHEPURENKO; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.
Word count: 364
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 1, 2016"
