"TEL AVIV -- A gunman whom relatives identified as an Arab citizen of Israel opened fire in the center of Tel Aviv on Friday, killing two Israeli Jews at a crowded bar and wounding at least five others. The assault created mayhem along a busy street and led to an intense manhunt by the authorities. The suspect was still at large late Friday.
The assault was carried out in broad daylight on Dizengoff Street, one of the city's main commercial arteries, and it immediately raised fears of a new type of violence in an already volatile atmosphere.
The attack took place against the backdrop of a recent wave of assaults mostly carried out by Palestinians from the West Bank or East Jerusalem using knives, cars, and, in a few cases, guns. In footage from security cameras, the gunman was seen stepping out of a health food store, calmly aiming and shooting along the street with some kind of submachine gun.
But the authorities were cautious about labeling the shooting a terrorist attack. Hours after the assault the minister of public security, Gilad Erdan, said on Israeli television that it was still unclear whether the motive for the attack was political, terrorist or criminal in nature.
The police refused to identify the suspect, who managed to escape. The police later announced that no details related to the shootings would be made public while the investigation was underway.
Ynet, a leading Israeli news site, said that the suspect had \"expressed support for Daesh\" in the past, referring to the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. If the gunman turns out to have been inspired by the extremist group, or was sent by that group or any other militant organization, that would represent a dangerous escalation in the area, according to Israeli analysts.
But a relative of the man widely believed to be behind the attack played down any profound ideological motivation. In a telephone interview he said that the man suspected in the shootings had psychological disorders and that it was likely that he was addicted to drugs or alcohol.
The relative, Sami Melhem, a lawyer who said he had represented the suspect in the past, identified him as a 29-year-old resident of Arara, an Arab town in northern Israel. \"He has severe depression and unusual behavior,\" Mr. Melhem said.
Israeli media said that the suspect's father, who volunteered with the Israeli police, had recognized his son in the security camera footage shown on television and had alerted the authorities. Mr. Melhem added that the police were questioning the suspect's father and said that other family members were too distraught to talk.
Mr. Melhem said that the 29-year-old had spent five years in an Israeli jail for trying to seize a soldier's weapon. According to reports in the Israeli news media, a cousin of the suspect was fatally shot by a police officer about 10 years ago while he was trying to steal a car, and the suspect had wanted to use a soldier's weapon to avenge his cousin's death.
At least 20 people in Israel have been killed over the past three months by Palestinian assailants mostly acting alone, without the assistance of a known organization. About 130 Palestinians have been killed during the same period, up to two-thirds of them while carrying out attacks, or attempting to attack Israelis, according to the police. Others have been killed in clashes with the Israeli security forces in the West Bank and East Jerusalem and along Israel's border with Gaza.
Only a few of the recent attacks have taken place in Tel Aviv or its environs.
Friday's attacker appeared in the video footage to be dressed in black and wearing glasses. He opened fire on businesses including a pub, a cafe and a sushi restaurant -- but his main target appeared to be the pub, the Simta.
The men who were killed were identified as Alon Bakal, a Tel Aviv resident and the manager of the pub, and Shimon Ruimi, from the southern town of Ofakim.
\"When I walked out, I saw the mess: a person lying on the road, full of blood, and the other store near the pub destroyed, with all its windows blown out,\" said Haim Pinto, 40, the owner of a nearby jewelry store.
He said he had rushed to hide in the bathroom of his store after a woman ran toward him, screaming: \"There's a terrorist. Run.\"
Israeli security forces rushed into nearby streets searching for the gunman. Dozens of people gathered as plainclothes security officers, riot police officers and intelligence officers cordoned off and canvassed the area, which was strewn with shards of glass. Several of the officers presented business owners with court orders allowing them to seize security-camera footage.
Security footage broadcast on television appeared to show the gunman filling a plastic bag with nuts in the health food store, then emptying most of them out, apparently after checking the price with a cashier. He then appeared to place a bag or a backpack on a shopping cart, remove his gun, load it and step outside before opening fire from the sidewalk.
The attacker appeared to have initially fired single rounds before unleashing automatic fire, Israel's Channel 2 News reported. He replaced the magazine of his firearm at least once during the attack.
\"We realized within a second that it was a shooting,\" said Assaf Ben Ezra, 40, the owner of a restaurant called the Meatpack, which is across the street from the Simta pub.
Mr. Ben Ezra opened the back door of his restaurant so fleeing customers could move away from the street. He later emerged to see one of the victims lying on the ground, bleeding.
By evening, the crowds were gone and police cordons blocked off some of the shops. A few residents paused to watch the scene. One woman walked past and shouted, \"Death to Arabs.\"
At the Simta bar, workers and bystanders had placed small candles at the doors of the establishment, which were still askew. The lights were still on.
Credit: DIAA HADID; Irit Pazner Garshowitz, Jonathan Rosen and Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from Jerusalem.
Photograph
Israeli Police Officers at the Scene of a Shooting Outside a Bar in Central Tel Aviv. Two Were Killed and at Least Five Others Were Hurt in the Daytime Attack. The Gunman's Motive Was Not Known. (Photograph by Tomer Appelbaum/European Pressphoto Agency)
Word count: 1091
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 2, 2016"
