"For all the sound and fury surrounding the weekend bomb plots in New York and New Jersey, the reality is that the anti-terror system worked. In a metropolitan area of 20 million people, the prime suspect was tracked down and captured within 36 hours. Through a combination of luck, good police work and the bomber's ineptitude, no one was killed.
Law enforcement showed impressive skills collecting video images that showed suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami moving explosives near the scene of a blast in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood. Authorities pulled his fingerprint from an unexploded device discovered nearby.
City leaders kept the public informed each step of the way. Despite the usual hand-wringing on social media, most New Yorkers remained composed. By Monday morning, police were circulating Rahami's name and photo.
People were vigilant. A tip phoned in late Monday morning about a man who looked like Rahami sleeping in the doorway of a bar in Linden, N.J., led to a shootout with police and his arrest.
All in all, a satisfying conclusion to a scary couple of days. Yet how did the Republican nominee for president react to this sequence of events? As shrilly as the screech of tires on pavement or a baying car alarm.
The episode, said Donald Trump, proved that \"we can't let any more people come into this country.\" We need \"extreme, extreme vetting\" of Muslim immigrants. We shouldn't supply terror suspects, even U.S. citizens such as Rahami, with decent medical care and quality legal representation. Donald Trump Jr. did his part by tweeting an image (on an iPhone invented by the son of a Syrian immigrant) comparing Syrian refugees to Skittles.
Well. Is there room for improvement in immigration security? Sure.
Rahami was questioned after returning from Afghanistan, and more could have been learned about the state of his loyalties after those visits. An audit released Monday showed that the U.S. government mistakenly granted citizenship to 858 people from dangerous regions or areas of high immigration fraud.
Even so, the terror threat needs to be kept in perspective. Terrorism has killed fewer than 100 people in America since 9/11. The U.S. allows about 70,000 refugees to enter each year; President Obama raised that figure to 85,000 this year. Those from violent areas already receive stringent screening.
Since 2009, there have been only about 10 occasions where refugees were arrested on terrorism-related charges. Of the most deadly homegrown attacks in recent years, nearly all were carried out by people born in the USA -- second-generation immigrants -- including Omar Mateen, the shooter at the gay nightclub in Orlando that left 49 dead in June.
Immigration bans do nothing to stop people already here, and alienating Muslim Americans risks shutting down a vital conduit of information that police need to ferret out threats from self-radicalized individuals.
Protecting the homeland from the simmering threat of terror requires careful military operations abroad and painstaking police work at home -- efforts that shouldn't be drowned out by the sounds of political expediency.
Illustration
photo Justin Lane, epa
Word count: 537
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
