"KABUL, Afghanistan -- The departing commander of American and NATO forces in Afghanistan, Gen. John F. Campbell, warned of challenging times ahead for the country and encouraged reforms in the Afghan security forces, which have struggled in fighting a resurgent Taliban without NATO combat support.
After 18 months in command during a period of military and political conflict, General Campbell handed off on Wednesday to Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr. of the United States Army. The new commander, who leads a force of about 13,000, will oversee NATO's reduced mission of training and assisting the Afghan forces at a time when the Taliban insurgency has spread wider than at any point since the group was removed from power in 2001.
\"I know there are some very, very tough times ahead for the country of Afghanistan,\" General Campbell said. \"But I do see a resilient people, resilient security forces and they're going to get through these challenges.\"
As the handoff ceremony concluded in Kabul, a squad of five suicide bombers attacked the Indian consulate in the eastern city of Jalalabad. The attackers were killed by Afghan security forces before they could enter the compound, but the assault still left at least three people dead and 19 others wounded, according to Attaullah Khogyani, a spokesman for the provincial government.
The long course of the Afghan war has played out as General Campbell has risen through the senior ranks of the American military. He arrived early in the war as a brigade commander with the rank of colonel, and will retire as a four-star general after a career spanning 37 years.
General Campbell led the forces in Afghanistan when a messy election stalemate in 2014 threatened to unravel the country. Subsequently, he struck up a close relationship with the Western-brokered unity government led by President Ashraf Ghani and enjoyed the kind of access that previous American commanders had lacked during the tense final years of Hamid Karzai's presidency.
During his tenure, General Campbell oversaw the transition from a direct American combat role to a more advisory one. He was in command when an American airstrike on a Doctors Without Borders Hospital in Kunduz city killed at least 42 people.
General Nicholson, who is beginning his fourth tour in Afghanistan, will lead an American and NATO support mission that has been increasingly drawn back to the battlefield to try to thwart major Taliban victories.
Last week, the general visited southern Helmand Province, where hundreds of American advisers and soldiers are helping Afghan forces keep the insurgents from capturing Lashkar Gah, the provincial capital. The Taliban control or contest 10 of Helmand's 14 districts, and have gathered in force in Babaji, a suburb of Lashkar Gar, where General Nicholson said he had stayed for several nights during his tour in 2009.
Leadership problems and corruption in the ranks of the Afghan forces have made the fight in the south difficult, Afghan and Western officials have said. Recently, more than 100 general staff officers have been replaced at the national level, and in Helmand the army corps commander as well as all the brigade commanders have been replaced, Western military officials said.
In comments to the press after his farewell ceremony, General Campbell said that in addition to leadership reforms, the Afghan forces need to address problems with recruiting and attrition. A recent government delegation found that only about half of the Afghan Army soldiers recorded as on duty in Helmand were actually present. The police force, which suffered heavy casualties on the front line of the fighting, also had a tough year, with thousands deserting.
\"They are working on an operational force generation cycle where you can have people actually take some leave time and be with their families, have time to train -- that will help out with the attrition,\" General Campbell said.
He added: \"Building an aircraft while in flight, that's kind of what it is. The Afghan security forces continue to grow, but at the same time they have to fight, and that is very, very tough.\"
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Credit: MUJIB MASHAL; Khalid Alokozai contributed reporting from Jalalabad.
Word count: 712
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 3, 2016"
