"I was a Marine working in signals intelligence in 2013 when Edward Snowden exposed the mass surveillance programs of the National Security Agency.
As a cryptologic linguist and intelligence analyst, my day-to-day activities were compromised when I was suddenly unable to use certain methods and tools due to the leak. Not only that, Snowden's action created a moral dilemma for me as a member of the intelligence community.
The Marine Corps is an organization brimming with intense patriotism. Snowden instantly became a hated enemy to the majority of the intelligence community. It was not uncommon to hear the sarcastic comment \"thanks Snowden\" somewhere in the office on any given day.
Unlike in the rest of the country, there was no controversy about whether Snowden was a hero or a traitor; blatant treason was how most military members viewed what he did. I believe that we need people like Snowden to keep our government in check. But any disagreement on my part would have put my own security clearance at risk, so I kept my unpopular opinion to myself.
Snowden, speaking Thursday to the University of Chicago's Institute of Politics in a virtual webcast, called his release of documents a public service and compared it to Martin Luther King's civil disobedience. Yet it seems that Snowden's disclosures have done little to affect the NSA.
Mass surveillance has seen wild growth since 9/11. By 2013, the NSA had built what is likely the largest domestic intelligence apparatus in history. By 2015, the agency had far more domestic data than it could use.
The response from proponents has been some variation of the idea that we need mass surveillance to fight terrorism; that by weakening the NSA's abilities, we are letting the terrorists win.
In the three years since Snowden's leak, intelligence agencies have continued and even increased their surveillance -- doubling their warrantless searches for information on Americans in an NSA database from 2013 to 2015, for example -- with little backlash. In fact, the Pew Research Center found in December that only 28% of Americans were worried that anti-terror policies had gone too far in restricting civil liberties. Twice as many were concerned that the government hadn't gone far enough to protect the country.
Historically, the excuse of national security has led to loss of basic human rights within a defined wartime period. That is not the case with today's war on terror: Our loss of privacy rights could extend for an unknown amount of time.
We must not falsely be convinced that our right to privacy is less important than national security. If we continue to accept our government's reasons for domestic mass surveillance, the United States will become reminiscent of George Orwell's 1984.
Domestic mass surveillance is not the solution to ending terrorism, and it never will be.
Dan R. Sendik, a computer science student at Columbia University, spent five years in the Marine Corps as a signals intelligence analyst.
Word count: 513
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
