"ASHKELON, Israel -- The Palestinian manager of the Gaza branch of World Vision, a major Christian aid organization, was charged by Israeli prosecutors on Thursday with infiltrating the charity on behalf of Hamas and funneling about $43 million in the group's funds over the past six years to the military wing of the Islamist militant group.
While neither the World Vision employee, Mohammad El Halabi, nor the aid group have had a chance to review the evidence and respond to specific charges, the allegations have cast a cloud over nongovernmental organizations in Gaza.
By Thursday evening in Jerusalem, the Australian government announced the suspension of funding to World Vision's projects in the Palestinian territories. Describing the allegations as \"deeply troubling,\" Dave Sharma, the Australian ambassador to Israel, announced the suspension in a statement on Twitter, pending the outcome of an investigation by Australia's foreign affairs department.
Mr. Halabi was arrested on June 15 at the Erez crossing point between Israel and Gaza, the territory controlled by Hamas, which is considered a terrorist organization by Israel, the United States and the European Union.
A senior official with Israel's internal security service, Shin Bet, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of his agency's rules, said that Mr. Halabi was recruited by the military wing of Hamas in 2004 and was instructed to infiltrate World Vision and to attempt to reach an influential position.
Briefing reporters on Thursday in the Israeli city of Ashkelon, the official said that Mr. Halabi became the manager of the Gaza branch of World Vision in 2010, and had subsequently transferred about 60 percent of World Vision's annual budget for Gaza to Hamas.
The official said that some of the money had been used by Hamas militants to dig cross-border tunnels for the purpose of carrying out attacks in Israeli territory. Donations were also used to build a Hamas military base, and 2,500 food packages meant for needy families in Gaza were transferred to Hamas battalions, the official added.
In addition, Mr. Halabi is accused of initiating a greenhouse project designed to hide tunnel work. A project for the rehabilitation of fishermen was, in practice, used to provide motorboats and diving suits for Hamas's military marine unit, the Israeli authorities said. The allegations could not be independently verified.
The Shin Bet official said that officers raided the organization's offices in East Jerusalem, and emphasized there was no evidence from the investigation and interrogation of Mr. Halabi that World Vision had been aware of the misuse of its funds in Gaza.
World Vision said in a statement on Thursday that \"we have no reason to believe the allegations are true\" based on the available information, and stressed that there was no suggestion the organization had been complicit in any diversion of funds.
Tim Costello, the chief executive of World Vision Australia, which has been deeply involved in the Gaza project, said his organization was nevertheless \"very worried\" about the impact the accusations would have on its ability to raise funds and work.
\"We are profoundly shocked by these allegations,\" Mr. Costello said. \"We want to get to the bottom of this, we want the truth.\"
Mr. Costello said he did not think it was appropriate for the Israeli authorities to publicly accuse Mr. Halabi and World Vision of the diversion before they had a chance to review the evidence. He added that Mr. Halabi was prevented from consulting a lawyer for the first 25 days of his detention.
\"We just really want a fair process, where Mohammad, once charged, gets to present his side, because we want to know the truth about this,\" he said. \"The truth comes out when you hear both sides.\"
Maj. Gen. Yoav Poly Mordechai, an Israeli official responsible for liaising on civil affairs in the West Bank and Gaza, met in Jerusalem on Thursday with World Vision leaders and presented them with the results of Israel's investigation and a confession from Mr. Halabi, according to a statement released by General Mordechai's office.
Hamas representatives were quick to dismiss the Israeli accusations, saying they had no faith in confessions obtained by Israeli intelligence officials, while maintaining that Palestinians were legitimately allowed to use all means to defend themselves.
\"We do not trust the occupation, nor the information coming from the occupation,\" said Yehia Mousa, a Hamas legislator in Gaza, referring to Israel. \"The occupation employs false stories and spreads them.\"
Israel withdrew its forces and settlers from Gaza in 2005, but continues to strictly control movement in and out of the Palestinian enclave, with the help of Egypt.
The Shin Bet official said that while the investigation did not implicate World Vision in the purported scheme to divert funds, it did reveal an abysmal lack of monitoring and supervision by the organization of its donations and projects.
Israeli officials have, in the past, raised suspicions about the Palestinian employees of aid organizations, saying some sympathized with Hamas. Shin Bet said its investigation of Mr. Halabi had pointed to additional figures in the Gaza Strip who exploited their work in humanitarian aid organizations and United Nations institutions on behalf of the militant group. But the agency had previously found nothing on the level of the deception that Mr. Halabi is accused of, which the Shin Bet official described as an \"extraordinary episode.\"
Mr. Halabi appeared to command respect with officials in the humanitarian aid world, with some saying he dedicated his life to helping children after seeing the devastating impact of conflict.
In an interview published on World Vision's website, Mr. Halabi said he found the most rewarding aspect of his work was when \"we manage to restore the smiles of children who are severely traumatized by the devastating bombs which killed part or all of their families.\"
In a separate interview, he said that he had lost eight relatives to airstrikes during the 2014 Gaza summer war with Israel. One of those relatives was pregnant, he said, and doctors aborted her child in a failed effort to save her life.
World Vision has said that its donors sponsored 4.1 million children around the world last year, providing about $1.2 billion in funds. The current recipients include about 40,000 Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The organization has used a sponsor-a-child fund-raising model for five decades, to play on the power of personalization, although most of the money is used to finance projects in the child's community rather than going directly to the child or the child's family.
In the West Bank village of Husan, for example, the organization was said to have spent about $1.5 million from 1996 to 2006, a former employee said, helping to dig wells, build greenhouses, fix roads, prepare land for planting and repair fences. The group built a community center and outfitted the four-story building that houses the village council.
AuthorAffiliation
ISABEL KERSHNER and DIAA HADID Follow Isabel Kershner @IKershner and Diaa Hadid @diaahadid on Twitter.
Credit: ISABEL KERSHNER and DIAA HADID; Isabel Kershner reported from Ashkelon, and Diaa Hadid from Jerusalem. Moushira Jammal contributed reporting from Gaza City.
Photograph
Mohammad El Halabi, an Employee of the Christian Aid Organization World Vision, at His Indictment On Thursday On Charges of Funneling an Estimated $43 Million in Charity Funds to Hamas. (Photograph by Dudu Grunshpan/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 1252
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 5, 2016"
