"Investigators grappled with key aspects of the bombings in Brussels, including how many terrorists were involved, how many were at large and the identity of the victims and the missing.
Also unclear was how many people were killed in the attacks. At least 31 people, perhaps as many as 34, were killed, and as many as 300 people were injured.
An urgent question for investigators was the identity of a man wearing a hat and light-colored clothing on surveillance video inside the Brussels Airport on the morning of the attack.
He was walking with two of the terrorists who died in the operation, Ibrahim El Bakraoui and bombmaker Najim Laachraoui. The unknown man pushed a cart carrying luggage that contained a 35-pound bomb that did not detonate. He fled the scene before the attacks occurred.
There may be another terrorist on the run.
French newspaper Le Monde and the Belgian public broadcaster RTBF reported that a man carrying a large bag was seen on CCTV at the Maelbeek metro station with Khalid El Bakraoui, who police identified as the suicide bomber on a subway car.
Family and friends of people missing since the attacks frantically searched for information.
The search was complicated by the fact that 61 people among the hundreds of injured remained in intensive care.
A website called \"Brussels Missing\" was established as a clearinghouse for people looking for missing friends and relatives. The site contains pleas for information and photos of people from their Facebook pages or vacation trips.
The people are broken down into four categories: Missing, Safe, Injured and Deceased.
One message, written in three languages, says, \"My friend has no news of her mother, Fabienne Vansteenkiste. She was in the airport at the time of the attacks. If you have any information, please contact Thomas S. Thank you.\"
According to media reports, Vansteenkiste, 51, had just finished her shift as a baggage handler when the bombs exploded at the airport.
One of her friends, Ikke Egeltje, expressed anger that some media reported Vansteenkiste's death when nothing had been officially established.
\"We are very angry with these newspapers and media, which confirm things so that we ourselves have not had information for two days,\" Egeltje wrote on the Brussels Missing website. \"Not only for us but for all the families that remain without news and who learn these speculations. To protect us, we don't read the media for the moment.\"
Credit: Doug Stanglin, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo PHILIPPE HUGUEN, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 449
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
