"A Virginia man identified by Kurdish forces as a member of the Islamic State in Iraq turned himself in Monday while apparently trying to flee to Turkey, Kurdish military authorities said.
Spokesmen for the State Department and White House said they were still collecting information on the case. \"Obviously, U.S. officials have been in touch with both Iraqi and Kurdish officials about this situation,\" White House press secretary Josh Earnest said.
The Kurdish news agency Rudaw, citing a local commander, said Muhammad Jamal Amin is an American citizen from Virginia with a Palestinian father and Iraqi mother from Mosul.
Rudaw said Amin had mistaken peshmerga territory for the Turkish border when he approached a checkpoint near the Iraqi town of Sinjar, which in recent months had been taken back from Islamic State militants. The peshmerga, the Kurdish nationalist guerrilla organization, initially fired on Amin before detaining him, Rudaw reported.
Amin had entered Syria from Turkey two months ago, Rudaw said. Kurdish Maj. Gen. Feisal Helkani told the Associated Press that Amin surrendered with cash, three cellphones and three forms of ID. CBS News, citing two Kurdish military sources, reported that Amin apparently was trying to defect. NBC News reported that the man pictured in photos as Amin was identified by an uncle as Mohamed Jamal Khweis, 26, of Alexandria, Va. Kamal Khweis told NBC his nephew does not speak Arabic.
The Obama administration estimates there are now fewer than 25,000 Islamic State militants, down about 6,000 from less than two years ago. Last month, Earnest cited battlefield deaths and the difficult task the group faces in luring new recruits to explain the drop in numbers.
Late Monday, the Department of Defense confirmed to USA TODAY that senior ISIL operative Omar al-Shishani is believed to be dead after an airstrike several days ago in Northern Syria. Initially, al-Shishani was reported to have died in an airstrike a week ago, but later reports indicated he was initially injured.
Last week, a former Islamic State militant reportedly leaked documents containing names, addresses and phone numbers of 22,000 extremists to Sky News, the British broadcaster said.
And in Rochester, N.Y., a pizza shop owner who admitted in December to recruiting for ISIL, has \"renounced\" the terror group, federal prosecutors said. Mufid Elfgeeh is to be sentenced Thursday.
Credit: John Bacon, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo SAFIN HAMED, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 422
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
