"The 911 call came early Sunday, before the shooting began.
The caller was a 29-year-old man, pledging his allegiance to the Islamic State terrorist group. He praised Boston Marathon bombers Dzhokhar and Tamerlan Tsarnaev, and moments later, armed with an AR-15-style assault rifle, a handgun and what Orlando Police described as \"an unidentified device,\" he engaged police in a gunbattle outside the Pulse, one of the city's most popular gay nightclubs.
Across Orlando for nearly two weeks, revelers had been celebrating Gay Pride month -- citywide, a week-long \"Gay Days\" festival had ended days earlier. One of the largest gay pride events in the world, it advertises itself as \"America's favorite LGBT vacation experience.\"
Saturday night was Latin Night at the Pulse, and though closing time was fast approaching, about 320 people were still inside dancing and drinking early Sunday.
One of them was Brand White, 30, of Orlando, who was with his cousin when shots rang out. \"We are dancing and all of a sudden it just started like a rolling thunder, loud and everything went black,\" he said.
White was shot in the shoulder. Hours later, he couldn't recall leaving the club or how he got to the hospital. His cousin was unaccounted for.
Brett Rigas said he and his partner were dancing when they heard the shots. Rigas, shot in the arm, hid behind a bar. Five minutes later, authorities came in and told everyone to put their hands up and run out. As he left, Rigas said, he saw bodies.
The shooting soon became a hostage situation, police said, with a SWAT team summoned as police got updates from patrons in the club. A few escaped through the back of the club.
Finally, before 5 a.m., police conducted a controlled detonation and used an armored vehicle to break through a wall at the nightclub. Eleven Orlando Police officers exchanged gunfire with the suspect, who was shot and killed.
Orlando Police Chief John Mina initially estimated the death toll at more than 20, but after police were able to get access to the scene, Mina said 50 were dead and 53 hospitalized.
Brevard County (Fla.) Sheriff Wayne Ivey, who took in the scene first-hand early Sunday, called it \"one of the most horrific things I've ever seen.\"
A federal law enforcement official told USA TODAY that the suspect had been identified as 29-year-old Omar Mir Seddique Mateen. He'd actually been on law enforcement's radar years earlier -- FBI Special Agent Ronald Hopper said agents had investigated Mateen in 2013 and again in 2014 regarding terror threats, but in both cases authorities found insufficient evidence to pursue charges.
New York-born, Mateen lived in Fort Pierce, about 120 miles south of Orlando on Florida's Atlantic coast, and worked for the security firm G4S. His parents lived in Port St. Lucie.
He'd attended public school in Stuart, Fla., and earned an associate's college degree in criminal justice technology from Indian River State College in 2006. He'd been married for about two years, then divorced. He had no criminal record. His family said he had a 3-year-old son.
A former Fort Pierce Police officer who once worked security with Mateen said the 29-year-old was \"unhinged and unstable.\"
Daniel Gilroy said he worked with G4S at PGA Village, a golf resort, for several months in 2014-15. Mateen took over from him in the afternoons and he said Mateen frequently made homophobic and racial comments. Gilroy said he complained to G4S several times, but said the employer did nothing.
Gilroy quit after he said Mateen began stalking him via text messages -- 20 or 30 a day, he said. Mateen also sent Gilroy 13 to 15 phone messages daily. \"This guy was unhinged and unstable,\" said Gilroy. \"He talked of killing people.\"
By contrast, Eleanora Dorsi, a resident of the club, told the Treasure Coast Palm that Mateen was \"very polite\" and \"always a gentleman.\"
Officials with the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives said Mateen had bought the guns legally within the last few days.
In the wake of the shootings, police departments across the USA said they would beef up patrols near locations frequented by the LGBT community.
Contributing: Kevin McCoy, Kevin Johnson, Allison Young, Steph Solis, USA TODAY; Chris Bonanno, Bob Gabordi, Florida Today; Anthony Westbury, Nicole Rodriguez, Treasure Coast Palm; AP.
Credit: Greg Toppo, @gtoppo, USATODAY
Illustration
photo Joe Raedle, Getty Images
Word count: 775
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
