"At least 56 civilians were reported killed on Tuesday in airstrikes north of the besieged Islamic State-held city of Manbij in northern Syria, and residents said they believed the attack was carried out by aircraft from the United States-led coalition, a monitoring group said.
The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that the dead included 11 children, and that dozens more people were wounded.
The so-called Syria Democratic Forces, an alliance of Kurdish and Arab fighters backed by the coalition, started an offensive at the end of May to seize Manbij. The area is among the last major territory held by Islamic State militants on Syria's frontier with Turkey.
Supported by American-led coalition airstrikes, the Kurdish forces have surrounded the city. But Islamic State attacks still occur in some areas of the surrounding countryside.
On Monday, 21 people were killed in raids also believed to have been conducted by United States-led coalition aircraft on Manbij's northern Hazawneh quarter.
The Observatory said at least 104 civilians had died in airstrikes since the start of the Manbij offensive in late May.
Col. Chris Garver, a spokesman for the United States-led coalition fighting the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq, said it was looking into reports of civilian deaths. He said the military was being \"extraordinarily careful to make sure\" that airstrikes were selectively hitting fighters for the militant group. The coalition said it had conducted more than 450 strikes in the vicinity of Manbij.
The United States High Commissioner for Human Rights recently voiced concern for the roughly 70,000 civilians believed to be trapped between warring parties in Manbij. In a statement, the commissioner, Zeid Ra'ad al-Hussein said civilians were reportedly being \"killed if they leave their homes or attempt to flee.\"
\"Families are unable to access local cemeteries to bury their relatives who have died or been killed,\" Mr. al-Hussein said, \"and are burying them in their gardens or keeping the corpses in bunkers.\"
The statement said that the town had no electricity or water, and that no medical facilities appeared to be open. It also said that as the Kurdish-Arab alliance closed in, ISIS fighters were not permitting civilians to leave.
In April, the United States Central Command said that from Sept. 10, 2015, to and Feb. 2, 2016, coalition airstrikes in Iraq and Syria probably killed 20 civilians and injured 11 others.
Word count: 405
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 20, 2016"
