"The Edward Snowden effect just made an encore, thanks to a report Yahoo has been scanning incoming emails on behalf of U.S. intelligence officials.
And it's likely to take a few more bows. U.S. technology companies, already in defensive mode thanks to the former NSA contractor's revelations of a mass government surveillance program in 2013, are even more data-hungry today and therefore more on edge.
From big data to the cloud to artificial intelligence you can talk to in your kitchen, the tech world is busy spinning the straw of information it gathers about users into gold.
While the privacy of corporate data has long been a concern among civil libertarians, a consumer flashpoint came when former NSA contractor Snowden released a trove of classified information about a mass NSA phone-spying program. A federal appeals court later ruled the bulk collection of phone data was illegal under the Patriot Act, but the damage to the reputation of U.S. computer companies was done.
The Snowden effect -- heightened public fear about information security and privacy in the wake of his revelations -- looms large as the power of the data troves being amassed by companies grows.
The potential to gain an edge with this data and sophisticated systems that model human behavior has been guiding big shifts in corporate strategy. Some of the most recent include Microsoft's purchase of LinkedIn and Salesforce's interest in the professional network as well as Twitter (both seen as plays for data); aggressive expansion into cloud computing by Microsoft, Google and Intel; and a stream of artificial intelligence-powered devices like Google's new Pixel phone and Home speaker, which aim to use your responses to make a \"personal Google.\"
With an estimated 1 billion active users a month worldwide and 81 million active Yahoo Mail users in the United States, Yahoo is a nexus for such data. Wednesday, a federal law enforcement official told USA TODAY that the government directive ordering Yahoo to scan customer emails was issued by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court. That's the closed court in Washington, D.C., that oversees requests for surveillance warrants for foreign intelligence purposes.
The directive asked Yahoo to essentially sift through incoming email streams for a digital signature associated with a known terror organization.
While the Yahoo saga is still developing, the questions it raises show the problems faced by companies with a voracious need for data about their customers but also a user base that might turn on them should they find the companies have aided the government in spying on them.
Simmering under the surface is a fraught, unresolved legal and public battle between U.S. tech companies and the U.S. government over user privacy on the one hand and the need for intelligence in an age of terrorism on the other.
Credit: Elizabeth Weise, @eweise, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo 2013 photo by AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 506
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
