"The case against three young Somali-American men being tried on charges that they conspired to join the Islamic State wrapped up Tuesday.
Prosecutors argued that the men eagerly pursued the opportunity to fight and commit murders under the \"direction and control\" of the extremist group.
Defense attorneys countered in their closing arguments in the three-week trial of Guled Omar, 21; Abdirahman Daud, 22; and Mohamed Farah, 22, that their clients showed bluster in some of their private conversations but were never serious about fighting in Syria. Their lawyers said they were entrapped by a government informant into a conspiracy that has led to six of their former friends pleading guilty to conspiracy to provide material support for the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS.
The jury will begin deliberations Wednesday. The trial has captured the attention of the Twin Cities' large Somali-American community, which has seen about a dozen young people recruited to the extremist group's fight in Iraq and Syria.
Jurors heard from an FBI informant who secretly recorded chatter within the group, as well as testimony from two of the men from the group that have pleaded guilty. Prosecutors said the young men carefully schemed to make their way to Syria while trying to keep up the facade of being basketball- and marijuana-loving teens and 20-somethings.
\"These defendants were itching to commit a crime,\" federal prosecutor John Docherty told jurors. \"This conspiracy was a conspiracy to commit murder.\"
The Minneapolis group discussed the best way to outfox law enforcement sources -- and in some cases their parents -- so they could make their way to Syria undetected, prosecutors said.
The prosecution's star witness, Abdirahman Bashir, testified that he decided to turn informant as an FBI probe into the Islamic State pipeline from Minneapolis closed in on him.
Attorneys for the three defendants argued that their clients were victims of entrapment by Bashir, who cajoled them to make brash statements that he recorded for the FBI.
\"Do young men always mean everything they say -- especially when they are in a group of other young men?\" Bruce Nestor, a defense attorney for Daud, asked jurors. \"Do actions speak louder than words?\"
Murad Mohammad, an attorney for Farah, described his client as a \"wannabe.\" Mohammad said the FBI informant did not record Farah speaking of any allegiance to the terror group.
\"ISIL never contacted my client,\" said Mohammad, who added that Farah sought to travel to Syria to become a martyr but did not want to join the Islamic State. \"My client never contacted ISIL.\"
Credit: Aamer Madhani, @AamerISmad, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo AP
Word count: 467
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
