"LONDON -- The authorities in Belgium announced the arrests of six men on Thursday, and a court prolonged the detention of two others, in connection with a plot to attack the capital, Brussels, on New Year's Eve.
The six men were arrested after searches of seven houses in the Brussels area, amid growing scrutiny of a motorcycle club called the Kamikaze Riders. By Thursday evening, three of the six had been released after questioning, while the other three were being held for at least an additional 24 hours.
\"There are persons in the group who have been linked to Sharia4Belgium,\" a radical Salafist organization that the Belgian government has designated as a terrorist group, a spokesman for the federal prosecutor's office in Brussels said.
The group's Facebook page suggests that the members, all Muslims from the Brussels region, attend motor sports events, but it makes no mention of radicalization, extremism or violence. However, one of the men, Said Abu Shahid, has a YouTube account with videos supporting the Islamic State.
The two men arrested this week whose detentions were extended on Thursday have been identified in Belgian news reports as Mohamed Karay, 27, and Saïd Souati, 30.
The plot, along with other security concerns, prompted the Brussels City Council on Wednesday night to cancel the New Year's Eve fireworks that traditionally take place at the Place de Brouckère, a short distance from the city's central square, known as the Grand Place or Grote Markt.
Also on Thursday, the authorities announced that they had charged a Belgian man as part of their investigation of the Paris terrorist attacks that killed 130 people. He is one of nine who have been detained as part of that investigation.
The suspect, Ayoub Bazzarouj, a 22-year-old Belgian citizen, was arrested after the search of a house in the Molenbeek section of Brussels on Wednesday, officials said.
Mr. Bazzarouj was arrested at the same house in Molenbeek, on Rue Delaunoy, where Salah Abdeslam, a fugitive and the only direct participant in the Nov. 13 Paris attacks who is still believed to be alive, is thought to have hidden after the attacks.
About 10 cellphones were seized during the search that led to Mr. Bazzarouj's arrest, and they are being examined. No weapons or explosives were found in the house.
The suspect was \"charged with terrorist murder and participation at the activities of a terrorist organization,\" according to a statement from the federal prosecutor's office in Brussels.
Molenbeek, a working-class neighborhood west of the Brussels city center, was the home of at least three men believed to have taken part in the attacks: Mr. Abdeslam and his brother Ibrahim, who died in the attack, and Abdelhamid Abaaoud, who is believed to have been a planner of the attacks.
The other men who have been put in preventive detention in Belgium in connection with the Paris attacks, some of whom have not been fully identified, are:
Mohamed Amri and Hamza Attou, accused of being the getaway drivers for Mr. Abdeslam;
Abraimi Lazez and Ali Oulkadi, who are accused of helping Mr. Abdeslam after the attacks;
Abdellah Chouaa, who is suspected of being an associate of Mr. Abdeslam's;
Mohamed Bakkali, who lived at a house in the Belgian town of Auvelais that may have been used as a hide-out;
Samir Z., who is believed to have been a friend of Bilal Hadfi's, one of the attackers (another friend, Pierre N., has been granted conditional release);
Abdoullah C., who is suspected to have had contacts with Hasna Aitboulahcen, a cousin of Mr. Abaaoud. Mr. Abaaoud died in a police raid outside Paris on Nov. 18.
Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.
Credit: SEWELL CHAN and MILAN SCHREUER; Sewell Chan reported from London, and Milan Schreuer from Paris.
Word count: 664
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 1, 2016"
