"While working as an American contractor across the Middle East, Tairod Pugh earned a reputation for his abilities as an airplane mechanic and for his extremist views.
When the Islamic State beheaded its first American hostages in 2014, for instance, Mr. Pugh, 48, did not seem upset like his colleagues working at a small airline that serviced American military bases.
Instead Mr. Pugh leapt to the group's defense, telling his co-workers that the Islamic State, just like any other group, \"had a right to defend itself,\" his manager at the time, Aamer Aslam, testified on Monday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, at the start of Mr. Pugh's trial on charges that he had planned to provide support to the militant group.
That was only one of Mr. Pugh's inflammatory remarks, part of a pattern that began at least as early as 2001, when a colleague of Mr. Pugh tipped off the F.B.I. that he sympathized with Osama bin Laden, according to the prosecution's legal filings in the case.
In 2014 alone, Mr. Pugh, a Muslim convert from Neptune, N.J., managed to alienate colleagues and bosses at two different companies -- small airlines in Dubai and Kuwait that resupplied American military bases -- with his views about jihad and American foreign policy.
\"He shared these views,\" one of Mr. Pugh's lawyers, Eric Creizman, told the jury. \"He wasn't shy about it.\"
But whether Mr. Pugh ever took concrete steps to join a terrorist group is the trial's main question of fact.
\"The defendant, Tairod Pugh, tried to join ISIS,\" an assistant United States attorney, Mark Bini, told the jury on Monday during his opening statement. He said that in January last year, Mr. Pugh boarded a flight from Cairo to Turkey with the intention of finding his way to the Turkish-Syrian border and linking up with the Islamic State. Mr. Bini spoke of a draft of a letter Mr. Pugh had composed to his wife, but never sent, which laid out his intentions to fight for, and even die defending, the Islamic State.
But Mr. Pugh never got farther than Istanbul. He was turned back at the airport, deported first back to Egypt and then to Kennedy International Airport, leading to his arrest shortly thereafter.
And Mr. Creizman offered an innocent explanation for the trip. \"He goes there to look for a job,\" Mr. Creizman said. \"He goes there to clear his head.\"
Mr. Creizman noted that Mr. Pugh carried with him to Turkey copies of his résumé and records of his service in the United States Air Force in the late 1980s, as well as the names of several bathhouses to visit.
Although scores of American citizens and residents have been arrested in the last two years on charges related to the Islamic State, Mr. Pugh is one of the first to stand trial. He is also well into middle age, an anomaly in terrorism cases, in which the defendants tend to be young.
The trial's central question will be whether Mr. Pugh went to Istanbul as a hopeful Islamic State recruit or as a weary job seeker in search of some relaxation. But by the end of the first day of testimony, a broader but less clearly defined question hovered over the trial: What should the jury make of all of Mr. Pugh's inflammatory statements and his online interest in terrorist groups and Islamic militancy?
Mr. Bini, the federal prosecutor, told the jury that Mr. Pugh had grown increasingly radical, as he immersed himself in militant literature and violent videos online. Mr. Pugh had downloaded a beheading video, Mr. Bini said, telling jurors that \"you will see portions of it.\"
Was Mr. Pugh's viewing of such a video a sign that he agreed with such violence and that he was preparing to engage in such an act himself? Or, as Mr. Creizman maintained, was his interest in the videos just part of a \"fantasy\"?
Mr. Creizman acknowledged that Mr. Pugh's Internet activities \"suggested that Mr. Pugh very much admired ISIS,\" but he seemed to challenge the jury to side with Mr. Pugh to protect his inflammatory views, rather than condemn him for them.
\"None of this is illegal,\" the defense lawyer said of Mr. Pugh's ideas and his Internet activities. \"These are protected activities, thoughts, statements and beliefs.\"
\"In this country,\" Mr. Creizman said at another point, \"we don't punish a person for his thoughts.\"
Photograph
Tairod Pugh
Word count: 760
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 1, 2016"
