"WASHINGTON -- Younis Shokuri, a Moroccan detainee at the Guantánamo Bay prison, said he feared being repatriated to his native country. But the Moroccan government told the United States that it would probably release him without charges 72 hours after any transfer. So last September, Mr. Shokuri went home -- reluctantly, but voluntarily.
But despite its assurances, Morocco has kept Mr. Shokuri in custody and is weighing criminal charges, apparently focused on allegations that he was involved with a Moroccan terrorist group before his capture in Afghanistan in late 2001. Mr. Shokuri's lawyers have demanded that the Obama administration press Morocco to live up to what they thought was a deal.
Both governments have said little to explain the discrepancy.
Several officials familiar with behind-the-scenes legal and diplomatic discussions are now shedding light on the murky episode.
Beyond its importance for Mr. Shokuri, his situation illustrates how difficult -- and messy -- it can be to winnow down the ranks of detainees viewed as posing a lower-level security risk at the Guantánamo prison, which the Obama administration still wants to close in its final year in office.
Of the 91 remaining detainees, 34 are recommended for transfer, and a parole-like review group has been adding names to the list. Each man presents a problem: The government has to find a place that is willing to take him and that can be trusted to keep an eye on him without abusing him.
Republicans in Congress who oppose closing the prison frequently criticize transfers, noting that some former detainees have gone on to engage in terrorist activity after their release. Human rights groups have criticized the rare instances when the United States has forcibly repatriated detainees to countries that have questionable records on human rights.
The Moroccan government initiated prosecutions of all 11 Moroccan citizens repatriated from Guantánamo during George W. Bush's presidency; four were convicted and the rest were released for insufficient evidence, a leaked cable shows.
Three of the 11 reportedly went to Syria and were killed in the civil war there, fighting with an Islamist rebel group.
Rights groups have accused Morocco of torturing terrorism suspects, although American officials say it has lived up to diplomatic assurances not to abuse the former Guantánamo detainees.
Against that backdrop, Cori Crider, a lawyer for Mr. Shokuri with the London-based international human rights group Reprieve, said the American government appeared to have gotten rid of him in a \"dishonorable\" way.
\"At best the United States did not do enough to correct the record with the Moroccans before sending him back and are doing nothing now because keeping their promise to Younis is just not a priority,\" Ms. Crider said. \"And at worst they tricked him.\"
Ian Moss, the chief of staff in the State Department office that negotiates detainee transfers, said he could not comment on sensitive diplomatic conversations.
\"We continue to maintain an ongoing dialogue with the government of Morocco regarding its nationals formerly detained at Guantánamo,\" Mr. Moss said. \"Questions regarding ongoing judicial processes in Morocco are best directed to the government of Morocco.\"
Moroccan diplomatic and security officials did not respond to several inquiries.
Mr. Shokuri, now 48, left Morocco around 1990 and went to Pakistan, according to military and court documents. He eventually came to live in Afghanistan and frequently interacted with other Moroccan expatriates.
After the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, when the United States began bombing Afghanistan, he attempted to flee but was arrested by Pakistani security forces and transferred to Guantánamo.
Mr. Shokuri said he had been doing humanitarian work in Afghanistan, but the United States government suspected that he was a part of a terrorist organization focused on overthrowing the Moroccan monarchy, called the Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group, or G.I.C.M. In 2003, the group was linked to a suicide bombing attack in Casablanca.
In all, 14 Moroccan men were brought to Guantánamo from the Afghan war zone. Most were repatriated by the Bush administration, but Mr. Shokuri was still there in 2009, when the Obama administration created a six-agency task force to review the remaining detainees. It recommended transferring him, too.
But at the time, at least, the United States did not seem to think he was innocent. State Department cables from October 2009 that were leaked by Pvt. Chelsea Manning, formerly Bradley Manning, show that \"a key factor in the approval\" of putting him on the transfer list was the understanding that Morocco would prosecute him, meaning he would stay locked up after his return.
Meanwhile, however, in a habeas corpus lawsuit, Mr. Shokuri's lawyers argued that the evidence that he was part of the Moroccan terrorist group was dubious, saying it traced back to \"tortured confessions\" from prisoners in Moroccan custody and unreliable jailhouse informants.
By 2011, the Justice Department dropped from the litigation its claim that Mr. Shokuri was part of the Moroccan group. Reprieve has portrayed this decision as showing that Mr. Shokuri \"now faces potential prosecution for long-disproven allegations that the United States withdrew years ago.\"
But officials familiar with the litigation decision said the American government was agnostic on whether Mr. Shokuri was part of the Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group. Speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss sensitive internal deliberations, they said two complications had arisen about using evidence about that group in the habeas case.
Not only had Mr. Shokuri's lawyers alleged that some of the evidence was tainted by torture, but it was unclear whether the Moroccan group counted as an \"associated force\" of Al Qaeda in the era before Mr. Shokuri's capture, the officials said. The government claimed wartime authority to detain members of the groups against which Congress had authorized military force, not every militant Islamist in the world.
Ultimately, they said, the government decided it was unnecessary to deal with those issues. It simplified the case by dropping the Moroccan terrorism claims, telling a judge that Mr. Shokuri was instead detainable based on alleged ties to Al Qaeda or the Taliban. The judge never ruled on whether the evidence for that claim was sufficient because the government was already working on transferring him anyway.
In 2014 the State Department explored the notion of sending Mr. Shokuri to Germany, where he has family, but the discussions with officials in Germany did not bear fruit.
Then, in March 2015, according to Reprieve, State Department officials told a Reprieve staff member that Moroccan officials had said that if he came home, his government would likely let him go after a 72-hour period and did not intend to prosecute him.
Neither country has offered a public explanation for why Morocco has not done that.
But according to officials familiar with the case, the Moroccan government has privately told the United States that Mr. Shokuri said new things during that 72-hour period that raised new concerns, apparently about the Moroccan terrorist group, changing the premise of its prior intentions.
Khalil Idrissi, a Moroccan lawyer representing Mr. Shokuri in the current investigation, said in a phone interview that his client had been treated well physically, although he was extremely depressed.
Asked about the claim that Mr. Shokuri implicated himself in the Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group in some new way, Mr. Idrissi said that he had read the statements his client had made to Moroccan interrogators and that none incriminated him.
\"What he said about his relationship with the Moroccans in Afghanistan is that they were friends and that they would pray on Fridays together and eat couscous, and the reason they had relationships was that they were from the same country,\" Mr. Idrissi said through an interpreter.
\"He said that he never participated in any meeting that involved talking about attacking Morocco.\"
Mr. Idrissi said that Mr. Shokuri had found out later that some of the people he knew in Afghanistan became members of the Moroccan terrorist group, but maintained that he had never heard of the organization at the time.
For her part, Ms. Crider said she did not buy the idea that Mr. Shokuri had really said something new and significant.
\"That really feels to me like an explanation that has been made up after the fact because they had to have some face-saving explanation,\" she said.
In a final complication, it is likely that Mr. Shokuri would have ended up in Morocco even if he had not gone voluntarily. Judges have given the executive branch broad latitude to decide where to transfer wartime detainees without judicial second-guessing.
Still, Ms. Crider said that she would have contested the repatriation vigorously on behalf of Mr. Shokuri, and \"as bad as the law is on this, an effort to force him would have looked terrible for them.\"
Credit: CHARLIE SAVAGE and AIDA ALAMI; Charlie Savage reported from Washington, and Aida Alami from Paris.
Photograph
Thirty-Four of the 91 Remaining Detainees at the GuantáNamo Prison, Above and Left, Have Been Recommended for Transfer.; Younis Shokuri (Photographs by Ben Fox/Associated Press) (A7)
Word count: 1519
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 7, 2016"
