"SAN BERNARDINO, Calif. -- Federal investigators announced Tuesday that they had accounted for almost all the four hours between the time that a husband-and-wife terrorist team killed 14 people at a holiday party here last month and the time that they died in a bloody police shootout -- all except for an 18-minute window.
And amid signs that the investigation is slowing down, they issued a public appeal for help from anyone who might have information on what the couple, Syed Rizwan Farook and Tashfeen Malik, did from 12:59 p.m. to 1:17 p.m. on Dec. 2, perhaps in the form of a witness sighting or an image by a stray surveillance camera.
\"Why are those 18 minutes important?\" said David Bowdich, the F.B.I. agent running the investigation. \"We want to know if they stopped at any residence, business, that we don't already know about.\"
\"It may very well not be an important fact, but until we close that gap, we just don't know for sure,\" Mr. Bowdich said.
Police officials said that using surveillance cameras and other techniques, they had determined that the couple had driven, apparently aimlessly, in an L-shaped grid of streets near their home and the attack site in the black sport utility vehicle they rented before the attack, stopping from time to time at various sites and corners.
There were no indications that they visited any people or businesses during the three hours and 42 minutes the authorities have now chronicled.
Mr. Bowdich said officials had interviewed 550 people, collected 500 pieces of evidence and executed 29 search warrants. \"As of today, we do not see any indication of a foreign-directed terrorist act,\" he said. \"This seems to be an inspired terrorist attack.\"
A friend and former neighbor of Mr. Farook's, Enrique Marquez, has been charged with several related crimes, including illegally supplying weapons to the couple.
Mr. Marquez, who told the authorities that he had no advance knowledge of the terrorist attack, is to be arraigned Wednesday on the weapons charge as well as charges of conspiring with Mr. Farook in planning an earlier terrorist attack that was not carried out.
Officials said Mr. Farook left his home at 8:37 a.m. and arrived at the Inland Regional Center, where co-workers were attending a morning training session and a holiday party, at 8:47 a.m. They said he left at 10:37 a.m., leaving behind a knapsack filled with pipe bombs that were never detonated. He returned at 10:56 with Ms. Malik and opened fire, leaving 14 people dead and 22 injured.
From there, the couple went to Seccombe Lake, which is a short drive from the Inland Regional Center. F.B.I. divers searched the lake last month and found no items related to the investigation.
Mr. Bowdich said the conference room where the attack took place had been decorated for a Christmas party, with gifts under a Christmas tree.
He said he considered that a potentially significant factor in the choice of targets by the couple, who were Muslims. He declined to elaborate.
Mr. Bowdich said the couple spent most of the four hours after the attack driving.
\"A lot of zigzagging around, going back and forth on the highway, going up and down,\" he said. \"There is no rhyme or reason to it that we can find yet. Maybe that 18-minute gap closes that gap, maybe it doesn't.\"
Word count: 575
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 6, 2016"
