"Israel has increased security measures in Arab communities as a growing number of Muslims sign up to fight for the Islamic State across the border with Syria.
The Shin Bet, Israel's security agency, estimates that 50 Israeli Arabs have joined the civil war in Syria or fighting in Iraq, and more may do so soon. The worry, as in Western countries, is that these fighters with the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS, will return to commit terrorist acts.
\"ISIS recruits from Israel were not regarded as a problem a year ago, but the security establishment sees them as a concerning trend,\" said Boaz Ganor, of the International Institute for Counter-Terrorism at the Interdisciplinary Center in Herzliya, Israel.
Last year, Israel officially outlawed the Islamic State, and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced that he will revoke the citizenship of anyone planning to join the organization.
Most of the more than 1.5million Arab citizens of Israel hold Israeli passports that allow them to travel to countries such as Turkey, where Islamic State recruits pass through to reach Syria.
\"The phenomenon of Israeli Arabs joining ISIS is relevant to the homegrown terrorist phenomenon of Muslim communities in Western countries,\" Ganor said.
The threat comes as Israel confronts Palestinian stabbings and shootings against Israeli civilians and soldiers.
The Islamic State appears to be trying to capitalize on the violence to recruit fighters. In September, it released a video of what appeared to be a masked Israeli Arab militant speaking Hebrew who praised the Palestinian attacks and vowed to ensure that \"not one Jew will be left in Jerusalem or around it.\"
In a December taped message, Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi threatened attacks against \"the Jews in Palestine.\"
Israeli Arabs who sympathize with the Islamic State come from impoverished communities and feel neglected by the Israeli government, said Faik Oudeh, mayor of Jaljulia, an Arab village.
In November, Israeli authorities discovered six residents were planning to join the Islamic State.
\"We are citizens of the country. We respect its laws, but this is a new generation that suffers from discrimination and wants more,\" Oudeh said.
Credit: Shira Rubin, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
graphic
Word count: 395
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
