"WASHINGTON -- House Republican leaders on Wednesday backed away from plans to vote on a gun measure that already faced broad Democratic opposition after their own conservative members said they would also reject it.
Speaker Paul D. Ryan had promoted legislation that would allow the government to block the sale or transfer of a gun if officials demonstrated to a judge within a few days that the buyer might have links to terrorism. But on Wednesday, Mr. Ryan stepped back from an itinerary that had included voting on that measure by the end of the week, saying that the bill still had a path to passage but that the House would vote on it \"when we're ready.\"
\"We have members from both sides of the aisle who want to make improvements, who want to make changes to the bill,\" he told reporters. \"We want to make sure we get it right.\"
Mr. Ryan's comments came after some Republicans -- many of them anti-establishment conservatives who are part of the House Freedom Caucus -- began to voice vehement opposition to the bill, saying it would empower the government to infringe on constitutional rights without due process.
Representative Justin Amash, Republican of Michigan, said the legislation would be \"among the most egregious gun control measures ever to pass either house of Congress.\"
In a Facebook post, he said, \"If the bill becomes law, it will mark a massive expansion of the government's ability to restrict gun rights on the basis of precrime -- a crime not yet committed.\"
The House Rules Committee, which sets the parameters for consideration of legislation, postponed its plans to examine the bill on Tuesday night, saying it wanted to give members more time to examine and discuss the bill. The committee will need to review the bill and decide whether to allow amendments to be added, for instance, before the House votes on it.
The House overwhelmingly approved legislation on Wednesday to expand and improve mental health care, a bill Republicans said would help address gun violence.
The bipartisan gun legislation had emerged as lawmakers headed home for the Fourth of July break, a sort of \"take it or leave it\" reply to Democrats' sit-in protest on the House floor. Democrats broadly opposed it, continuing to demand votes on measures that would expand background checks and prevent those on the no-fly list from purchasing firearms.
The Senate recently rejected a similar measure, making it clear that even if the bill were to clear the House, it would probably be dead on arrival in the other chamber.
But Republican opposition appeared to stymie plans to forge ahead with the measure with just a week and a half to go before Congress breaks for a seven-week recess, as conservatives demonstrated once more their ability and willingness to derail even their own majority-party's legislation.
For perhaps the first time since Democrats seized the floor in a nearly 26-hour protest, they were not steering the conversation Wednesday. Aware that they are unlikely to get the votes they want in a contentious election year, they are also cognizant that they are in a unique juncture -- one in which the confluence of terrorism and guns in the massacre at an Orlando nightclub last month has brought a few more Republicans to their side.
Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, and other Democrats appeared again with advocates outside the Capitol on Wednesday, continuing to prod Republicans.
\"The overwhelming majority of Americans want action to keep guns out of the hands of suspected terrorists and criminals -- real action, not a bill written by the gun lobby that they're going to try to bring up today that will do nothing to keep our community safe,\" Ms. Pelosi said. \"But the Republican House still refuses to disarm hate and allow a vote on common-sense gun violence protection.\"
Democrats have worked to keep up the momentum, even holding events during last week's recess to try to energize wary advocates and prod Republicans. But Republicans have hardly been conciliatory, with House leaders saying Tuesday that they are looking at punishing Democrats for rules they may have violated during their protest, including a prohibition on streaming video from the House floor.
Mr. Ryan met late Tuesday with Representatives John Lewis of Georgia and John B. Larson of Connecticut, Democrats who organized the recent sit-in. Both sides said it was a pleasant meeting, though Mr. Ryan did not acquiesce to the Democrats' request for votes on their measures. Mr. Larson said Mr. Ryan did not invite them to offer suggestions to improve the pending legislation.
Democrats are working largely behind the scenes to strategize \"moment to moment\" about the next steps of their protest, Mr. Larson said. He said that should the rules committee examine the pending bill, the 13-member panel can expect a lot of company at its hearing -- specifically, Democrats demanding votes on their measures.
\"I think you will see the Rules Committee, that generally doesn't have an awful lot of participants, you're going to see a lot of people there wanting to hear about the two bills -- the 'no fly, no buy' and expanded background checks -- and ask for that vote,\" Mr. Larson said.
In the meantime, Democrats have found themselves standing in unfamiliar company against the current bill. Representative Louie Gohmert, Republican of Texas, said Wednesday that he would not support the pending bill in light of the burdens it could place on ordinary citizens who might erroneously be placed on a terrorist watch list.
Moreover, Mr. Gohmert -- who caused a stir during the sit-in weeks ago when he demanded to know why Democrats were not focusing on the role of terrorism in the shootings in Orlando and nearly came to blows with another lawmaker -- said the legislation amounted to rewarding Democrats for seizing the floor.
\"There was just a massive violation of rules, and there are supposed to be consequences, and so far the only consequence that we've seen is they're going to get a gun vote, like they were demanding,\" Mr. Gohmert said. \"That's basically giving them what they want.\"
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.
Photograph
An Anti-Gun Rally Outside the Capitol On Wednesday. Democrats Are Looking to Keep Pressure On Republicans for Tougher Gun Laws.; Members of Congress, Gun Violence Survivors and Their Families at the Capitol On Wednesday. (Photographs by Mark Wilson/Getty Images) (A11)
Word count: 1107
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 7, 2016"
