"The Pentagon plans to spend $1.8 billion in the coming year to replenish its depleted stocks of smart bombs and missiles because warplanes are pounding Islamic State targets at an accelerating rate, Defense Secretary Ashton Carter announced Tuesday.
The dwindling arsenal of satellite-guided bombs and missiles fired from drones was first reported by USA TODAY in December.
Carter said the Pentagon planned to address the shortfall in the Pentagon's 2017 budget. The U.S.-led air war has conducted more than 10,000 airstrikes, many requiring multiple bombs and missiles to hit fighters, weapons and equipment from the Islamic State, also known as ISIL.
\"We've recently been hitting ISIL with so many GPS-guided smart bombs and laser-guided rockets that we're starting to run low on the ones we use against terrorists the most,\" Carter said. \"So we're investing $1.8 billion dollars in 2017 to buy over 45,000 more of them.\"
By December, the Air Force, which conducts a majority of the strikes along with warplanes from the Navy and Marine Corps, had fired 20,000 missiles and bombs at Islamic State targets, forcing logistics officers to scour stockpiles around the world to ensure a steady supply for Iraq and Syria.
Monday, the top U.S. commander in Iraq, Army Lt. Gen. Sean MacFarland, said the air campaign that began in 2014 saved Iraq from falling into the hands of the Islamic State. He referred to the terrorist group by another name, Daesh.
\"Coalition airstrikes initially blunted Daesh's advances and prevented a battle in Baghdad and along with it, the very survival of Iraq,\" MacFarland said. \"Now, coalition strikes not only target the enemy on the front lines, they are increasingly hitting Daesh across Iraq and Syria and its ability to fund and control terror operations.\"
The coalition reliance on sophisticated bombs and missiles that hit fighters and minimize killing or wounding civilians and destroying their homes has driven demand for the weapons, said Army Col. Steve Warren, a military spokesman in Baghdad.
Credit: Tom Vanden Brook, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo LT. COL. LESLIE PRATT, European PressPhoto Agency
Word count: 369
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
