"Thomas Sutherland, a former agriculture professor who was swept up in an international drama when he was kidnapped by Islamic militants in Lebanon in 1985 and held for more than six years, died on Friday at his home in Fort Collins, Colo. He was 85.
His wife, Jean, said the cause had not been determined, though he had a heart condition.
Mr. Sutherland was among dozens of Westerners taken hostage in Beirut in the 1980s at the height of Lebanon's civil war. When he was kidnapped, he was the dean of agriculture at the American University of Beirut.
After he was snatched near his Beirut home, where he lived with his wife, Mr. Sutherland was confined in a series of rooms, often blindfolded and chained to a wall, by gun-toting men who operated under Hezbollah, the Lebanese militant group.
The Western hostages were abused regularly, hit with fists, sticks and rifle butts, said Terry Anderson, the longest-held American, who was a Middle East reporter for The Associated Press. Mr. Anderson said he and Mr. Sutherland had spent a great deal of time together, lying side by side on cots and engaged in conversation.
\"He had a particularly difficult time, especially in the first two years,\" Mr. Anderson said on Sunday. \"He had always been in academia. He was a gentle man, and he just couldn't understand what was happening.\"
To break the boredom, Mr. Sutherland gave Mr. Anderson lessons in French and agriculture. In return, Mr. Anderson taught him how to play chess, using pieces made of tinfoil, and bridge. Mr. Sutherland later said his talks with Mr. Anderson had been critical to his coping with the captivity.
Thomas McNee Sutherland was born on May 3, 1931, in Falkirk, Scotland, to William and Helen Sutherland, and grew up on a dairy farm. He graduated from the University of Glasgow in 1953 with a degree in agriculture and then traveled to the United States, where he earned a Ph.D. degree in animal science from Iowa State University in 1958.
He joined the faculty at Colorado State University and later became a naturalized American. He took a leave of absence to go to Beirut in 1983.
In a joint memoir, Mr. Sutherland and his wife portrayed themselves as fairly innocent upon their arrival there, according to a review in The Los Angeles Times. They found themselves in a war zone, surrounded by bombings, assassinations and abductions.
In 1989, four years into Mr. Sutherland's captivity, George Bush began his presidency with a call for renewed efforts to free the hostages. \"Good will begets good will,\" he said in his inaugural address.
On Nov. 18, 1991, under a deal brokered by the United Nations, Mr. Sutherland was released with another hostage, Terry Waite, an envoy of the Anglican Church. Mr. Anderson, the Associated Press reporter, was released a short time later.
When Mr. Sutherland arrived to a crowd of well-wishers at San Francisco International Airport, he had on his arm his 4-year-old granddaughter, a girl he was getting to know for the first time.
\"Hello, America, and thank you,\" he said. \"We're going to have a very, very happy Thanksgiving.\"
In Fort Collins, the home of Colorado State, the trees were decorated with yellow ribbons.
\"One of the greatest moments in the history of Colorado State University was the afternoon in 1991 when we welcomed our friend and colleague Tom Sutherland home from his long captivity in Beirut,\" the university's president, Tony Frank, said in a statement on Saturday.
Mr. Sutherland became a professor emeritus at Colorado State, and in his 70s, he took up acting.
In addition to his wife of 60 years, he is survived by three daughters, Kit Sutherland, Joan Sears and Ann Sutherland; seven grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren.
In 2001, the Sutherland family won a lawsuit against Iran over its role in financing Hezbollah. Individual members of the family received sizable payouts from frozen Iranian assets, including more than $23 million for Mr. Sutherland, much of which he gave to charity.
After that, he joked that he was on an \"extended vacation paid for by the shah of Iran,\" The Denver Post reported.
Photograph
Thomas Sutherland with His Daughter Kit After Returning to Colorado in 1991. He Was Kidnapped During Lebanon's Civil War. (Photograph by Jeff Robbins/Associated Press)
Word count: 738
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 25, 2016"
