"For the first time, the world's highest criminal court ruled this week that destroying cultural antiquities is a war crime.
The case, handled by the International Criminal Court in The Hague, spotlights the risk to historic sites in places controlled by Islamic extremists, who have traded plundered antiquities on the black market or destroyed them in a twisted interpretation of religious law. Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi, a member of a jihadist group linked to Al Qaeda, was sentenced to nine years in prison for organizing the destruction of centuries-old Muslim shrines in Timbuktu, Mali.
But does the court's action this week signal a greater international effort to pursue justice in these cases? Will the court now prosecute members of the Taliban or the Islamic State for similar war crimes?
The likely answer is no.
The case against Mr. Mahdi \"does signal that these sorts of cases are on the court's radar,\" said Alex Whiting, a professor at Harvard Law School and a former senior official in the Office of the Prosecutor at the International Criminal Court.
\"The court is very much a court of opportunity,\" he added. \"It's a court with very little power, little resources to investigate and very few tools to collect evidence. Is cultural heritage something the court will now focus on? Now that they've done one case, a second, similar case is unlikely.\"
Limiting the ability of the court to pursue similar charges is its jurisdiction, which became effective in 2002. The court can pursue cases only in countries that are party to the treaty that oversees it, or cases that have been referred to it by the United Nations Security Council.
The Timbuktu shrines, brick and mud structures built from the 15th to 17th centuries atop the graves of Muslim scholars, are modest in comparison with the massive Buddha statues destroyed in Afghanistan or the Roman ruins demolished by the Islamic State in Syria.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban dynamited the 1,500-year-old Buddha sculptures in Bamian in 2001, calling the massive monuments \"gods of the infidels.\"
Afghanistan is a member of the court, but the destruction of the statues occurred before the court opened, so that case cannot be prosecuted, according to the court's charter.
For now, the court is also unable to pursue cases in Iraq and Syria. In Syria, the Islamic State used bombs, bulldozers, sledgehammers and fire to destroy the 2,000-year-old Greco-Roman monuments in Palmyra. In Mosul, Iraq, the militants destroyed a museum and an early Christian monastery. But those countries have not accepted the jurisdiction of the court, and the United Nations Security Council has not asked it to intervene.
That means the court \"can't do anything in Iraq and Syria, about antiquities or war crimes or anything,\" Professor Whiting said.
This month, Fatou Bensouda, the court's prosecutor, issued a policy paper on \"case selection and prioritization.\" The paper expands the focus of the court to include environmental degradation, corporate crime and land grabs when connected to other grave crimes against a population.
\"We are not adding new crimes,\" Ms. Bensouda said in an interview. \"We are merely expanding the focus of the crimes, looking at the broader context.\"
But some critics say that by expanding the idea of what constitutes crimes against humanity, the court may be moving away from its central mission: prosecuting the worst violations of human rights.
Others have criticized the geographical focus of the court's prosecutions, noting that in the court's first 10 years, all of its cases involved situations in Africa. Most of those, however, were brought by African governments themselves.
That record has fueled the perception that the court applies justice unequally -- by some accounts, prejudicially -- passing up cases involving major crimes to go after easier ones that single out Africans.
Defenders say that given the court's limited resources and jurisdiction, it has chosen cases that are symbolic of certain types of crimes. Its first trial in 2009 involved the use of child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The most recent conviction in Mali, intended to highlight the destruction of cultural sites, was also set in Africa.
Some Africans, led by dictators who have been the focus of international investigations, have accused the court of being a neocolonial institution. At the same time, African nations make up one-fourth of the court's membership. The prosecutor and many of the court's judges and staff members are Africans. And despite the criticism, African countries cooperate with the court: Niger handed over Mr. Mahdi, the Islamic extremist, and it was the Malian government that asked the court to investigate the events in Timbuktu.
\"Mali could not bring this guy to justice for destroying those sites,\" said John Mukum Mbaku, a professor at Weber State University in Utah and a nonresident senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, citing the country's weak institutions.
\"The court,\" Professor Whiting of Harvard said, \"doesn't perceive itself as targeting Africans, but vindicating African victims. The complaint used to be no one cared about Africa. Now attention is being paid.\"
Photograph
The Rubble Left From an Ancient Mausoleum Destroyed by Islamist Militants in Timbuktu, Mali. (Photograph by Joe Penney/Reuters)
Word count: 876
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 30, 2016"
