"Democrats and their allies hope Sunday's massacre in Orlando generates momentum in Congress to pass legislation protecting gay rights and barring gun sales to suspected terrorists.
Gay-rights groups and their supporters in Congress are reigniting their push for passage of the Equality Act, a bill to amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sex, gender identity, and sexual orientation. The legislation is stuck in the House and Senate judiciary committees.
\"Passing the Equality Act is the most important signal we can send as a country that we don't tolerate discrimination,\" said Rep. Sean Patrick Maloney, D-N.Y., an openly gay congressman who is co-sponsoring the bill. \"If we want to signal to LGBT Americans that discrimination is wrong, then that's the bill that does it.\"
Meanwhile, Democratic senators said Monday that they will seek in the coming days to take up legislation drafted by California. Sen. Dianne Feinstein that would ban gun sales to terror suspects.
The measure would allow the attorney general to block the sale of firearms to known or suspected terrorists if there is a \"reasonable belief\" the weapons may be used to carry out an attack. Convicted felons and fugitives are banned from buying guns, but suspected terrorists are not.
\"How many more people have to die at the hands of a terrorist with a gun before the Senate acts?\" Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., said in a conference call with reporters. \"I hope and pray the answer is none.\"
Both bills face an uphill climb.
The Senate voted down Feinstein's legislation last year after a renewed push following the December shootings in San Bernardino, Calif., where a radicalized couple opened fire at a holiday party killing more than a dozen people. Republicans have argued there is not enough protection for a person to regain their gun rights if they are banned because of inclusion on a terror watch list.
Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., chairman of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, told USA TODAY that he would oppose Feinstein's legislation if it came up for a vote this week. He said there is no due process for people included on a terror watch list, and that the Orlando shooter wasn't currently listed so the bill wouldn't have prevented Sunday's massacre.
Johnson said federal officials instead should increase engagement with Muslim communities in the United States to get more, better intelligence.
\"We've got to wipe out ISIS, deny them that territory, destroy that caliphate and then relentlessly be committed to destroying Islamic terror groups wherever they reside,\" he said.
Conservative groups, including the Family Research Council, oppose the Equality Act.
\"It would effectively require high schools to allow boys in the girls' locker rooms, strip elementary schools of the authority to dismiss a kindergarten teacher for transitioning from a male to a female during the course of the school year, and could force religious hospitals to provide sex-change operations and family-owned businesses to affirm such behavior,\" the FRC said.
In addition to pushing for the Equality Act, Maloney said he will continue his efforts to pass legislation banning federal contractors from discriminating against gay and transgender workers. Democrats and about 40 Republicans voted last month to attach Maloney's measure to an energy and water spending bill. However, that provision led Republicans to join Democrats in objecting to the overall bill, and it was voted down.
Credit: Erin Kelly and Donovan Slack, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo
Word count: 609
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
