"NEW DELHI -- All six gunmen who infiltrated an Indian Air Force base near the border with Pakistan and exchanged fire with security forces have been killed, India's defense minister said Tuesday.
Security forces were searching the base for explosives on Tuesday, the fourth day of the operation, Manohar Parrikar, the defense minister, said in a televised news briefing from Pathankot, in Punjab State, where the attack took place.
The attack, which began Saturday, was viewed as an attempt to undo recent improvements in the relationship between India and Pakistan. It came a week after Narendra Modi became the first Indian prime minister in 12 years to visit Pakistan in a step toward reviving dialogue between the two countries.
Seven Indian security personnel died in the gun battle at the base, which lasted several days. Ammunition recovered from the gunmen is believed to have come from Pakistan, Mr. Parrikar said Tuesday. The head of India's National Investigation Agency told reporters that intercepts of phone calls made by the gunmen indicated that they had come from Pakistan.
In a telephone call with Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan on Tuesday, Mr. Modi \"strongly emphasized the need for Pakistan to take firm and immediate action against the organizations and individuals responsible for and linked to the Pathankot terrorist attack,\" according to a statement released by Mr. Modi's office.
\"Specific and actionable information\" about the attackers was provided to Pakistan, the statement said.
Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said in a statement released Monday that the government \"is in touch with the Indian government and is working on the leads provided by it.\"
The attackers were armed with AK-47s, pistols, commando knives, mortars, hand grenades and high-quality explosives, Mr. Parrikar said. The base is spread over 1,900 acres, and 3,000 families of military personnel live there, but the attackers were confined to a small area, and no family members were killed, Mr. Parrikar said.
\"My worry is how they managed to come inside,\" he added.
Word count: 343
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 6, 2016"
