"NAIROBI, Kenya -- American officials said Wednesday that an explosion on a Somali jetliner that punched a three-foot hole through its fuselage in midair and killed one passenger was most likely caused by a bomb.
Their preliminary assessment heightened fears that the Shabab militant group in Somalia, suspected in the explosion, had figured out a way to plant the bomb in the plane.
The explosion on Tuesday rocked the Daallo Airlines flight, an Airbus A321, soon after it left Mogadishu, the capital, blasting a hole above the right wing. Two passengers were seriously hurt; another was apparently sucked out of the plane. It was unclear if he had been killed by the blast or by the plunge to the ground.
Somali officials said Wednesday that they had recovered the body of an older man who had fallen from the sky several miles outside Mogadishu.
American officials were initially concerned that the blast might have been caused by a surface-to-air missile. After the stricken plane circled back to Mogadishu, American military advisers who are working in Somalia with African Union peacekeepers rushed to investigate, American officials said. They quickly determined from the way the metal was punched out that the explosion had been caused by something inside the aircraft.
Somali news reports indicated that there had been around 70 passengers aboard. Daallo Airlines said in a statement that the plane had been heading to neighboring Djibouti and that the explosion happened about 15 minutes after takeoff.
The concern now is that the Shabab, who have killed thousands of civilians in their quest to turn Somalia into a puritanical Islamic state, may be practicing more sophisticated killing tactics, breaching the airport's security and placing a timed explosive device in the aircraft.
\"The Shabab have upped their game,\" said one former American military official who works in Somalia. \"And we're very lucky that device didn't go off when the plane was higher, or it could have brought the whole plane down.\"
The Shabab seem to be making a comeback after years of defeats at the hands of an African Union peacekeeping force. They are now retaking towns in southern Somalia and building a formidable arsenal of armored personnel carriers, artillery and even American-made Humvees, all stolen from defeated peacekeepers. Last month, Shabab fighters ambushed a Kenyan forward operating base, killing as many as 100 Kenyan soldiers, and possibly more. It was the worst defeat the Kenyan military had ever suffered.
The Shabab also recently slaughtered civilians at a beachside restaurant in Mogadishu.
Antiterrorism experts say that if a bomb is confirmed as the cause of the plane explosion, it may also have been planted by members of the Islamic State's new branches in Somalia.
In recent months, dozens of Shabab fighters have defected to the Islamic State, which has a history of bringing down aircraft. The Islamic State is widely believed to have been behind the bomb that felled a Russian jetliner over the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt in October, killing 224 people.
So far, no one has claimed responsibility for the explosion aboard the Daallo flight.
One passenger, Awale Ali Kulane, a Somali diplomat, said there was a loud bang, the cabin filled with black smoke and the plane lurched down. \"Some of the people were reading the Quran, and everybody on board was worried,\" he said.
The American government has a large intelligence and law enforcement presence in Kenya that closely watches Somalia. On Wednesday, an American official said, the United States government asked the Somali government for permission to send F.B.I. agents from Nairobi, Kenya's capital, to Mogadishu to assist in the investigation.
So far, the official said, the Somalis have not responded.
\"There's a lot of guys around here who would love to get their hands on this,\" said the American official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss pending investigations. \"Right now, we're just waiting.\"
Credit: JEFFREY GETTLEMAN; Mohamed Ibrahim contributed reporting from Mogadishu, Somalia.
Photograph
A Hole in a Daallo Airlines Plane After Its Emergency Landing in Mogadishu On Tuesday. (Photograph by Associated Press)
Word count: 704
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 4, 2016"
