"Islamic State members believe that the vivid series of horror shows it produces has been central to the terror it invokes
Within the ranks of Isis, several categories of members hold a lofty status: the leaders who devise terror plots and battles, and those with cameras and microphones who chronicle them.
Senior fighters and propagandists hold more or less equal status in the world's most digital-savvy terror group. Isis has harnessed better than any of its rivals or predecessors the capacity to shape its message through media.
The latest production, in which the UK is directly threatened and five captives are slaughtered, emphasises themes that have remained constant for the past 18 months. This was made for an English-speaking audience, but along the way there have been other videos produced in French, Russian and even Hebrew, by cadres who have flocked to the so-called caliphate.
Those who lived among you now want to harm you -- so the message goes. And to hammer that home, the video threats are made with vivid high-definition clarity, filmed from multiple angles and using production values that give barbarism the feel of reality television.
Isis defectors, as well as several members who remain inside the organisation, have detailed the effort behind the group's media management -- a schedule and workload that could rival a television network. One former member of the Isis media team told the Washington Post that on any given day up to 100 members were dedicated to covering clashes, massacres or anything else deemed worthy of showcasing. The most senior among their ranks hold the position of emir (prince) -- a venerated title within a very status-conscious organisation.
Members typically receive written instructions, passed by messengers, which tell them to be at a certain location at a set time. They usually know nothing about what they will film. Execution scenes are especially well planned and are often only finalised after numerous rehearsals, with killers and victims reading from cue cards that have been carefully scripted by members employed as writers.
No aspect of a modern media operation is overlooked. Directors plan camera angles, editors draft scripts, translators ensure that the second language conveys the precise nuance, post-production work turns the filming into slick, shocking mini-documentaries, and finally IT professionals ensure that the videos are disseminated without giving away an upload point.
One former Isis member told the Guardian late last year that the group's leadership in Raqqa often deferred to senior members of the media team on operational issues, such as when to carry out executions or to publish threats. \"They were concerned about the light a few times,\" he said. \"Can you believe it?
\"They also study sentiment and public mood. This is where the foreigners are helpful. Many of them know the political cycles in their home countries, and can advise on when films are going to make more of an impact.\"
Isis's latest barrage of videos has coincided with developments in its military campaign, and the war against it. Sunday's video was a response to the UK decision to extend its bombing of the group from Iraq to Syria. An earlier video in Russian addressed Moscow's decision to intervene to support the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad. Numerous videos in French followed the co-ordinated attacks in Paris. All spoke of the \"impotence\" of those who attacked them, despite the serious losses of territory and personnel by Isis in recent months, which have underlined the caliphate's fallibility.
Isis's foreign legion is largely responsible for the media operation, although prominent Iraqi veterans of the group remain nominally in control. Isis members believe that the vivid series of horror shows it produces has been central to the terror it invokes.
One current member, who has remained close to the group since its earliest days said: \"They have learned a lot. Zarqawi didn't know media. In the past, they have been slow to react, and haven't known what buttons to push in the western psychology.
\"They loved the film they made of the burning of the Jordanian pilot. They even put it up on screens in Raqqa. All the outposts will start to do the same. Libya has already started. They are making jokes about their films getting awards.\"
Credit: Martin Chulov
Word count: 697
(Copyright , Guardian Newspapers Limited, Jan 4, 2016)"
