"Fractured, chaotic Libya has leapt back into the headlines this week, with a breakthrough in its tangled civil war and a vicious display of Islamist extremism's lengthening shadow.
The country has been in turmoil since the fall of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in 2011, after 42 years of eccentric dictatorship. Many Libyans hoped his ouster and death would herald a new era of democracy in the oil-rich nation. But the armed groups that overthrew him swiftly turned on one another, and the country plunged into anarchy.
Here are several key points.
Q. Who has control on the ground?
A. Everyone and no one. Different pieces of Libya are controlled by different militias, which may be organized by town, tribe or religious conviction. They are all vying for supremacy in something like a real-life \"Game of Thrones.\" The conflict is driven by fear, grievance, ambition and money, especially the country's dwindling but still considerable foreign exchange reserves, now estimated at up to $85 billion.
There is no deep sectarian divide in Libya, as there is in some Muslim countries. But the militants of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, have seized the opportunity to take root in the country, making it a potential springboard for terrorist attacks elsewhere in Africa, and in Europe.
Q. What is happening on the battlefield?
A. The military situation has been changing rapidly, especially in war-ravaged Benghazi, where the United States ambassador, J. Christopher Stevens, and three other Americans were killed by an Islamist mob in 2012. In some of the heaviest fighting in two years, forces loyal to Gen. Khalifa Hifter, one of the conflict's most prominent and divisive commanders, have unexpectedly broken a long deadlock in the city and made major gains. Crucially, General Hifter's fighters, using weapons supplied by the United Arab Emirates, took the city's seaport, which had been held by an alliance of Islamist militias including some Islamic State fighters.
Q. Why does the Benghazi breakthrough matter?
A. If General Hifter can hold his new ground, he may change the calculus for the peace effort and Western policy in Libya, which has been trying to overcome the country's east-west divide. The general's supporters, centered in the east, call him a necessary bulwark against Islamist extremism, while his opponents paint him as a power-hungry opportunist and would-be dictator.
He has strong backers, including the United Arab Emirates and Egypt under President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, and the support he received from the Emirates, in particular, helped turn the tide in Benghazi. In Western Libya, meanwhile, Turkey and Qatar are supporting a rival coalition of Islamist fighters and militias from Misurata, who together control the national capital, Tripoli.
Q. How is the West responding to the Islamic State threat?
A. Alarmed Western nations are considering a concerted campaign of airstrikes to halt the Islamic State's progress in Libya. But the thinking is that a campaign like that ought to have authorization from a sovereign Parliament representing all Libyans, and assembling such a Parliament is a goal the United Nations peace effort has yet to achieve.
Western military and intelligence services are taking more targeted steps. American warplanes have occasionally mounted airstrikes against high-level militants, including one last week on an Islamic State base near Sabratha, 50 miles west of Tripoli. That attack prompted a brutal reprisal by Islamic State fighters.
Q. What comes next?
A. Much hinges on whether Martin Kobler, the United Nations envoy for Libya, can cobble together a national unity government. It is not clear whether General Hifter's sudden gains have made that more likely, or have merely intensified the conflict among groups that, until now, have seemed to believe that Libya's peace would be won through war.
That leaves a policy dilemma for Western countries eager to confront the Islamic State. \"Either we act now on the terrorism threat and deal later with the consequences for stability in Libya,\" said Frederic Wehrey, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, \"or we hold off.\"
Credit: DECLAN WALSH; Reporting was contributed by Osama Alfitory in Benghazi, Libya; Suliman Ali Zway in Tripoli, Libya; and Alissa J. Rubin in Paris.
Photograph
A Soldier in Benghazi, Libya, On Tuesday. Militia Forces Unexpectedly Broke a Long Deadlock in the City This Week, Claiming Major Gains Against the Islamic State. (Photograph by Reuters)
Word count: 744
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 25, 2016"
