"KABUL, Afghanistan -- Taliban attackers stormed Afghan government buildings in Helmand Province on Wednesday, battling security forces for more than 10 hours before being killed, officials said.
The attack, on police and intelligence buildings in the Gereshk District of Helmand, involved as many as 10 insurgent fighters who were wearing police uniforms and suicide vests, according to Abdul Jabar Qahraman, the presidential envoy sent to manage the pitched battle against the Taliban in Helmand. The Taliban used their website to confirm that they were behind the attack.
Helmand is Afghanistan's largest province in terms of territory and opium production, and it has been the site of the Taliban's biggest gains over the past year, with the insurgents controlling or contesting most of the province's 14 districts.
Fears that the insurgents might overrun the entire province, including the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, have drawn back hundreds of American soldiers and advisers to help Afghan security forces plan the city's defense.
The fighting on Wednesday blocked the main highway connecting the south and west of the country for most of the day. Seven of the insurgents were killed in the early hours, Mr. Qahraman said, but three fled into a residential building that was under construction and put up a tough resistance. They were finally gunned down after commando forces entered the battle.
\"The fighting is over: The security forces have killed all bombers, and now the situation has turned to normal,\" said Gen. Abdul Rahman Sarjang, the police chief of Helmand.
A police official at the site of the attack said that at least three officers had been killed and five had been wounded. But a provincial health official said at least 14 wounded members of the security forces had arrived at hospitals in Lashkar Gah.
\"The fighting brought havoc to the town -- the main road has been blocked and movement is limited and fear has spread,\" said Mohammad Karim Attal, head of the Helmand provincial council.
Credit: MUJIB MASHAL and TAIMOOR SHAH; Mujib Mashal reported from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from K andahar, Afghanistan.
Word count: 356
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 10, 2016"
