"NEW DELHI -- In a rare show of cooperation, the Indian government on Tuesday permitted a team of Pakistani security officials to examine the scene of a militant attack at an air base in India that claimed the lives of six fighters and seven Indian soldiers in January.
The five-member security team, including military, police and intelligence officials, arrived in New Delhi on Sunday and met on Monday with the National Investigation Agency, which is handling the Indian investigation of the attack.
\"During the interaction, N.I.A. officers gave a detailed presentation on the evidence collected during the course of the investigation,\" said Sanjeev Kumar Singh, the inspector general of the agency, in a news briefing.
In a separate investigation, the Pakistani authorities said on Tuesday they had questioned more than 5,000 people and detained more than 200 of them in connection with the Lahore suicide bombing on Sunday that killed 73 people, including dozens of children, news agencies reported.
At least six militants infiltrated the Pathankot air base, in Punjab, on Jan. 2, digging themselves in and engaging in a dayslong gun battle with Indian security forces before they were killed. It took place just a week after Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India flew to Lahore for a meeting with his Pakistani counterpart, Nawaz Sharif. After the attack, India canceled a proposed visit of its foreign secretary to Pakistan to resume much-delayed talks.
The Pakistani authorities subsequently arrested several members of the banned militant group Jaish-e-Muhammad in connection with the attack, a move that India welcomed. After the arrests, Indian officials said the talks would be rescheduled \"in the very near future.\"
Tuesday's visit was a sharp departure from the response to the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, in which more than 160 people were killed by commandos from another militant group based in Pakistan. Afterward, Indian officials accused Pakistan of shielding the accused and of hiding evidence related to the investigation.
\"Here, from Day 1, they said O.K.,\" said G. Parthasarathy, a former Indian ambassador to Pakistan, by telephone on Tuesday.
Protests erupted in Pathankot on Tuesday as members of the opposition Congress party and the Aam Aadmi Party shouted slogans requesting that the team \"go back,\" and shouting \"Down with Pakistan.\" They seemed to object particularly to the inclusion in the team of an official from the ISI, Pakistan's intelligence agency, which Delhi frequently blames for attacks on Indian soil.
\"This is so shameful and so disgusting,\" said Kapil Mishra, an official with the Aam Aadmi Party, in televised comments.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Credit: HARI KUMAR; Nida Najar contributed reporting.
Word count: 457
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 30, 2016"
