"CORRECTION APPENDED. PALMYRA, Syria -- As my Hezbollah escort and I entered the modern city around Palmyra, we were greeted by the mangled body of an Islamic State fighter left to rot in the sun. He looked as if dogs might have gotten to him after Syrian government forces, backed by loyal militiamen, routed him and his comrades from the ancient city after almost a year of Islamic State control.
In that time, the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, destroyed some of the remains of a civilization that 2,000 years ago was a mix of Roman, Persian and local cultures.
Where Palmyra's impressive Temple of Bel once stood, only a single stone archway was left to frame a rectangle of blue sky above the arid desert about 160 miles northeast of Damascus, the capital.
I traveled to Palmyra on Saturday with members of Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shiite militia allied with President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, to see what remained of the archaeological treasures of Palmyra .
The Lion of al-Lat, a 2,000-year-old statue of a lion holding a gazelle in its mouth, had been felled by an Islamic State demolition team. The lion's broken nose had been placed in front of a pile of ancient rubble, its two large nostrils pointing upward.
Explosions leveled the stone walls and most of the Roman columns supporting the arches of the city's gate. One of the Syrian militiamen fighting with Hezbollah remarked that the \"ruins have been ruined.\"
Amid the ruins, we heard repeated booms emanating from the city center, where plumes of smoke and dust rose into the desert sky. My Hezbollah escort and Syrian soldiers explained that explosive-disposal teams were clearing mines left behind by retreating Islamic State fighters.
Dusty brown burlap hoods littered the floor of the Roman amphitheater, where Islamic State gunmen theatrically staged a mass execution.
We encountered remnants of the Islamic State's brutal, yearlong occupation strewn about the city's celebrated ruins.
The Hezbollah militiamen with whom I traveled were eager to show that their group had helped rescue Palmyra, a site important to world heritage. Russia, which provided air support; the Syrian Army; and other allied militias that helped fight the Islamic State are all claiming part of the credit for driving its forces out of the city.
During their occupation, Islamic State fighters toppled the gates along the ancient Roman promenade, the Decumanus Maximus. Newly broken columns with stained exteriors revealed their white-stone cores and lay on piles of rubble alongside columns that had fallen centuries earlier.
\"Our enemies are so stupid,\" Mohammad Salem, an Islamic State official, said from the outskirts of Palmyra, which lies beside the modern city of Tadmur. \"We captured a whole town and houses from them, and they recaptured sand and destruction.\"
The grand Roman amphitheater in Palmyra remained standing, weeds growing between the cracks in the terraced seating built in the second century. On a wall on the back of the amphitheater stage, Islamic State gunmen had drawn two crude targets in chalk. Tight clusters of pockmarks on the ancient stone walls showed where the militants had been taking target practice.
When I visited this weekend, the front gate of Palmyra's museum was locked with a heavy padlock, and buildings throughout the city had been heavily damaged by explosions.
Experts say that all sides in the Syrian civil war have participated in the looting of antiquities. I saw a hole dug near one of the ancient sites where an underground chamber that may have been a crypt could be reached. Shards of pottery and bone fragments had been placed on a stone, as if people had been searching underground for artifacts.
Despite the Islamic State's efforts, many of the ancient sites in Palmyra were undamaged. The destruction in the modern parts of Tadmur was far worse. Shops, cafes and houses in the city appeared to have been abandoned, empty of any signs of the once-vibrant city life in Syria.
Syrian soldiers and allied militiamen said that if residents were allowed to return to the city, Islamic State fighters might come back with them, and attempt to re-establish their presence in the city.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Correction: April 12, 2016, Tuesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on March 29 about an assessment of the damage done by the Islamic State to the ancient Syrian city of Palmyra referred incorrectly to the second-century triple arch ISIS destroyed. The arches were decorative, not triumphal, and therefore were not built by the Romans to celebrate their victory over the Persians. The errors also appeared in another article on March 29, as well as in a picture caption, about efforts to create three-dimensional digital models of Palmyra's threatened monuments in case the originals are damaged beyond repair, and the errors were repeated last Tuesday in a photo essay and in a caption by a Times photographer who visited Palmyra to document the destruction. The errors also appeared in an article and a picture caption on Oct. 6, 2015, about ISIS' destruction of the arches.
Photograph
A Pile of Rubble Now Lies Where Palmyra's Triumphal Arches Once Stood. The Site Was Leveled in Explosions Carried Out by the Islamic State in October.; the Lion of Al-Lat, a 2,000-Yearold Statue of a Lion Holding a Gazelle in Its Mouth, Was Destroyed by the Islamic State in June. The Statue Had Sat at the Entrance to the Palmyra Museum.; Remnants of the Militants' Occupation Remain Visible Around Palmyra: Left, the Body of an Islamic State Fighter On the Outskirts of the City; Center, Bedding Thought to Have Belonged to Islamic State Guards Near the Ancient Amphitheater; and Right, Bags Found at the Amphitheater That the Group's Executioners Are Said to Have Placed Over the Heads of the Condemned. (Photographs by Bryan Denton for the New York Times)
Word count: 1013
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 5, 2016"
