"KABUL, Afghanistan -- Secretary of State John Kerry arrived in Kabul on Saturday with a message of support for Afghanistan's struggling coalition government, which has been bogged down by infighting as it confronts an emboldened Taliban insurgency.
It was Mr. Kerry's first visit to the Afghan capital since he helped broker the coalition government in 2014, after a bitterly contested election threatened to unravel the country. President Ashraf Ghani and his rival Abdullah Abdullah, who serves as the government's chief executive, have failed to put aside their hard feelings, even as the Taliban have seized more territory and a bleak economic outlook has prompted an exodus of young people to Europe.
Mr. Kerry, who met with both Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah, also led a meeting of senior officials from both governments to assess the commitments from each side since the signing of a strategic partnership agreement between the United States and Afghanistan.
As if to underscore the perils confronting the government and the country, rockets landed near Kabul's diplomatic district not long after Mr. Kerry's departure. It was not immediately known if the rocket attack caused injuries or deaths, or significant damage.
The United States has about 9,800 troops in Afghanistan, as part of NATO's reduced mission to train and advise the Afghan forces, but also in a counterterrorism mission aimed at Al Qaeda and, as of January, the Islamic State affiliates that have arisen in parts of the country.
While the troop level is expected to be reduced to 5,500 by the end of the year, Mr. Kerry said President Obama's decision would take into account the views of the new United States and NATO commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John W. Nicholson, who is in the middle of conducting an assessment before he presents his recommendations to the Pentagon.
Mr. Kerry's remarks before his meetings with Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah suggested that the two leaders' continued bickering remained a concern.
\"We need to make certain that the government of national unity is doing everything possible to be unified and to deliver to the people of Afghanistan,\" he said.
Mr. Ghani, later appearing in a news conference with Mr. Kerry, thanked Mr. Obama for his flexibility on troop levels, and reaffirmed his government's commitment to making reforms and fighting corruption.
Afghanistan must show clear progress in those areas before requesting continued financing and other international commitments at two coming conferences, in Warsaw and Brussels.
\"The unity, national empathy, and responsibility of our political class in particular need to be strengthened,\" Mr. Ghani said.
The Afghan leaders still do not see eye to eye on many basic issues in the political document that was Mr. Kerry's instrument to bring them together, and their disagreements have slowed the government's response.
In September, the Taliban overran Kunduz, their first takeover of a major city since their fall from power in 2001. The Taliban have also made gains in the south of the country in recent months, particularly in Helmand Province, where they control or pose a threat in majority of the 14 districts.
Yet at a time of raging violence, which took the lives of nearly 6,000 members of the Afghan security forces last year, the top security ministries have been run by caretakers who do not have parliamentary approval. The minister of defense, for instance, remains as a caretaker even after failing his parliamentary confirmation. The ministers of intelligence and the interior resigned with harsh public words for the government.
After months of limbo, a new interior minister was finally approved by Parliament on Saturday, while the two leaders continue to disagree over the choice for a new intelligence chief. On the same day that the interior minister was confirmed, the government also finally got its first attorney general -- after the post had been vacant for a year and half.
The worsening security situation, dire economic prospects and uncertainty about the future have convinced many young and middle-class people that they would be better off elsewhere. Tens of thousands of Afghans have risked their lives on treacherous water routes to Europe even after the borders have begun to close down.
The Kerry-brokered agreement called for holding within two years parliamentary elections, delayed a year already, and a loya jirga, a grand assembly of elders from across the country, to amend the Constitution and change Mr. Abdullah's role of chief executive to the position of prime minister.
To avoid another electoral mess, the agreement also calls for overhauling the voting process.
With the agreement's deadline a little more than six months away, Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah have sharply disagreed over the mechanics of the overhaul, and they are unlikely to meet the requirements on time.
A vocal political opposition, made up mostly of officials from former administrations who have been alienated by the current leaders, has intensified its criticism, with an eye on the deadline. Many have even declared that the government, born out of a political agreement, will lose its legitimacy in October if the two leaders do not fulfill the promises they signed on paper.
Yet Mr. Kerry, at the news conference with Mr. Ghani, asserted that the coalition government did not have an expiration date.
\"Let me make this very, very clear, because I brokered the agreement, President Ghani signed it and Chief Executive Abdullah signed it,\" Mr. Kerry said. \"There is no end to this agreement at the end of two years or six months from now. This is an agreement for unity government the duration of which is five years.\"
Western and Afghan officials say certain advisers to Mr. Ghani are envisioning a different outcome: using the deadline to force out Mr. Abdullah. They argue that while the position of chief executive expires, the president will still have a mandate, from an election that they say was cleansed by a United Nations audit.
But American officials have told Mr. Ghani's faction that such a path would be unacceptable -- that, essentially,the government is only legitimate as long as both men are in it.
Credit: JAWAD SUKHANYAR and MUJIB MASHAL; Jawad Sukhanyar reported from Kabul, and Mujib Mashal from Mazar-i-Sharif, Afghanistan.
Photograph
Secretary of State John Kerry Meeting with Foreign Minister Salahuddin Rabbani of Afghanistan in Kabul On Saturday. (Pool Photo by Jonathan Ernst)
Word count: 1069
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 10, 2016"
