"JERUSALEM -- The man suspected of killing three Israelis last week in a shooting rampage in Tel Aviv was killed on Friday in a shootout with the police near his home in northern Israel, according to police officials.
Many details of the case were unavailable because of a government order of silence, and it remained unclear what the motives of the suspect, Nashat Melhem, may have been.
Earlier this week, with Mr. Melhem still at large, the Israelis authorities had apparently not yet determined whether the Tel Aviv shooting was an act of terrorism. On Friday, after the suspect was killed, the Israeli minister of public security, Gilad Erdan, issued a statement praising the police and security forces for tracking down Mr. Melhem, whom he referred to as \"the vile terrorist.\" Mr. Erdan did not elaborate.
Mr. Melhem, a 29-year-old Arab citizen of Israel, was from Arara, in northern Israel. He was believed to be the gunman who opened fire on a crowded bar in a bustling area of Tel Aviv on the afternoon of Jan. 1. A manager of the bar and a customer were killed. The gunman then fatally shot a taxi driver after he fled the scene of the shooting and tried to get away; the cabdriver was also an Arab citizen of Israel.
The police and Israel's Shin Bet domestic security agency had conducted an intense manhunt of the Tel Aviv area for Mr. Melhem. The authorities said on Friday that he was located after Shin Bet received information about where he was hiding.
Israel Radio reported that Mr. Melhem was found at a compound of several buildings and greenhouses owned by some of his relatives.
The police said that Mr. Melhem spotted special police forces approaching the building in which he was hiding, and that he tried to escape. He then opened fire on the security forces with the same weapon with which he is suspected of having carried out the attack the week before, and was fatally shot, the police said.
Mr. Melhem's father, Muhammad Melhem, is suspected of being an accomplice to his son's crime and of interfering in the investigation and he was being detained by the Israeli authorities. The father, who volunteered with the Israeli police in the past, had publicly appealed for his son to turn himself in. He said that he had alerted the Israeli authorities and tried to help once it became clear from security camera footage shown on television that his son was the gunman in Tel Aviv.
Several other family members were also detained for questioning during the week.
Israel's defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, also referred to Mr. Melhem as a \"terrorist,\" writing in a Facebook post on Friday, \"The elimination of the terrorist Nashat Melhem proves once again that the state of Israel will pursue with severity those who wish it ill everywhere, within the country, along its borders and even far from them -- and will lay its hand on them.\"
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Word count: 525
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 9, 2016"
