"Seven years, 2.6 million words and $13 million later, the official inquiry into the United Kingdom's role in the Iraq War delivered a damning verdict on Prime Minister Tony Blair's decision to join the conflict in 2003.
Beyond the scathing critique of Blair, the massive report confirms long-held conclusions about the war rather than breaking any ground.
When Blair, prime minister from 1997 to 2007, decided to join President George W. Bush's Iraq invasion, he did so with insufficient planning and on the basis of bogus intelligence. If he inflated that intelligence, misled Parliament or otherwise took action that crossed a legal line -- if he lied, in other words -- the report didn't say. And it never said it would.
\"Considering the amount of time, the length of the document and the money,\" the findings are disappointing, said Aidan Hehir, an expert on war, ethics and terrorism at the University of Westminster in London.
\"It's quite a forensic assessment of what happened. But from the beginning, the inquiry wasn't charged with what it should have been charged with: determining the legality or otherwise of the invasion and whether Blair and those around him should be charged with a crime,\" he said.
\"As much as this inquiry is a useful document, it's largely a public relations exercise. The information is already out there, and historians and academics have been writing about this for 10 years. They've been discussing in detail what happened, what went wrong -- this report is just a diplomatic way of saying what we already knew,\" Hehir said.
At the time, Blair and Bush argued that the war was legal because Saddam Hussein breached United Nations Security Council resolutions demanding that he relinquish his suspected weapons of mass destruction.
That claim was disputed in 2004 by then-U.N. secretary-general Kofi Annan, who said military action was illegal.
The issue of the conflict's legitimacy has never been resolved, and some in Britain have called for Blair to be prosecuted for war crimes.
Removing Saddam from power left hundreds of thousands of Iraqis dead and wounded and millions displaced. By 2009, when British combat forces left Iraq, 179 British troops had been killed, and nearly 4,500 American personnel had lost their lives.
Iraq still grapples with almost weekly bombings, atrocities and sectarian conflict unleashed after the overthrow of Saddam in 2003.
Last weekend, a bombing in Baghdad claimed by the Islamic State killed more than 175 people in one of the worst single attacks since the invasion.
The Chilcot inquiry, named after retired civil servant John Chilcot, who produced the exhaustive, if familiar, verdict, is a devastating critique of Blair's performance.
\"The U.K. chose to join the invasion of Iraq before the peaceful options for disarmament had been exhausted. Military action at that time was not a last resort,\" it found.
Blair's retort Wednesday that he acted in \"good faith\" and that the decision to invade Iraq was the most \"agonizing\" of his political career probably won't prevent further denigration of a reputation that has been tarnished by the massive sectarian violence unleashed in Iraq.
The report does not seem to have changed any minds or conclusions about the war.
\"From the public's point of view, the U.K.'s reason for going to war still seems rather fake and orchestrated,\" said Frederic Ischebeck-Baum, an intelligence and security analyst at King's College London. \"When Blair was in the U.S. talking to Bush about whether to go to war, he said we'll 'be with you, whatever.' He leaned out the window too far.\"
Credit: Kim Hjelmgaard, @khjelmgaard, USA TODAY
Word count: 623
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
