"Omar Mateen's behavioral problems began early in his school years. As an adult, working as a private security guard, his comments on the Fort Hood shooter worried the sheriff so much, he was transferred from his post at a courthouse.
Mateen's elementary and middle school records paint the Orlando nightclub shooter as a disruptive student who struggled with English.
His behavior -- marked by constant outbursts and classroom insubordination -- greatly contributed to his academic struggles, according to the documents. \"The main factor prohibiting Omar from success in school is not that the work is too hard but rather his difficulties in conforming to class/school rules,\" according to a letter sent to Mateen's father shortly before he withdrew from St. Lucie County's Southport Middle School in 1999.
Mateen, who on Sunday killed 49 people and injured 53 at an Orlando nightclub, bounced around St. Lucie County campuses from kindergarten until 1999, when he transferred to the Martin County Schools District in eighth grade.
He was disciplined 31 times between 1992 and 1999 for numerous disruptions, for striking a student and for disrespectful behavior during his time in St. Lucie County schools, according to documents obtained exclusively by TCPalm.com.
He had attended two kindergartens -- one in an Islamic school in Westbury, N.Y. -- before his family moved to Florida in 1991.
He attended Manatee Elementary School in first and second grade, then transferred to Mariposa Elementary School, where he finished second grade and stayed through fifth grade, according to documents.
As early as third grade, Mateen was verbally abusive, rude and aggressive, according to the documents obtained by TCPalm.com. He talked frequently of violence and obscenities, documents revealed.
In December 1995, while in fourth grade, Mateen was referred to a student study team -- comprising a teacher, psychologist, guidance counselor and parent -- for continuing to hit students, talking out in class and screaming at teachers and fellow students, according to records.
By seventh grade, at Southport Middle School in 1998-1999, Mateen was in danger of failing reading, language arts, math and science, according to reports.
He was withdrawn from Southport in August 1999, as he began eighth grade, and transferred to the Martin County School District.
In 2013, Mateen, then 26, was working as a private security guard for G4S Secure Solutions USA Inc. at the St. Lucie County Courthouse in Fort Pierce.
Mateen made many inflammatory comments at the courthouse in 2013, including a statement that Fort Hood, Texas, shooter Nidal Hasan was justified in killing 13 people and injuring more than 30 in 2009, Sheriff Ken Mascara said Wednesday.
That mass shooting took place Nov. 5, 2009. Hasan was an Army major and psychiatrist.
Mateen also made derogatory remarks about women and Jews, the sheriff said. \"That sent red flags to my staff and me and the FBI was immediately notified,\" he said. The FBI investigated Mateen but could not conclude he had leanings toward terrorism.
The sheriff's courthouse supervisor then requested that G4S transfer Mateen out of the courthouse rotation permanently.
Credit: Elliott Jones; Indian River (Fla) Press Tribune; Andrew Atterbury
Illustration
photo St. Lucie (Fla.) News Tribune
Word count: 557
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
