"For four months, the top minds and most lethal guns in the combined security forces of France and Belgium, not to mention the computer services of Interpol, have bent every resource toward unearthing one individual: the logistical mastermind of the Paris terrorist attacks that left 130 dead last November.
On March 15, four members of a Belgian anti-terrorist squad, accompanied by two French liaison officers, knocked on a door in an Arab-dominated neighborhood of Brussels. It was a routine \"verification of domicile\" in an apartment identified as \"cold\" -- unoccupied, water and electricity cut for weeks. But this routine door knock uncovered the first trace of Salah Abdeslam since he slipped through the porous French-Belgium border the day after the Paris attacks -- a fingerprint on a water glass left behind as the inhabitants fled.
Friday, Abdeslam was seized in the same Arab quarter where he grew up and where he had apparently been hiding for months.
Four days later, three bombs tore through the main departure hall of Brussel's airport and a metro station in the heart of the capital, killing at least 31 people and wounding more than 150.
Belgian extremists
One stark reality was lost amid the ecstasy of success in capturing, alive, Europe's single most wanted fugitive. How was this possible -- that he could remain concealed so close to home for so long? What does that mean for the ability to uncover more such plots still being hatched in Europe or the United States?
The first item for Abdeslam's interrogators will be to determine just how wide his net might be, information that not surprisingly was hardly forthcoming before the latest terrorist atrocity. But Abdeslam's information won't likely be all that wide or deep.
Small cells, operating autonomously, seem to be the rule. Any number of such cells could be lurking out there, each operating independently with its own lethal mission. Tuesday's airport and metro bombers could very well be just such an operation.
Per capita, there are more Belgians -- over 400 -- who've made their way to the battlefields of Syria and the ranks of the Islamic State terrorist group than from any other country. France, Britain and Germany lead in terms of absolute number of ISIL recruits from European countries.
It would be useful for the leaders of Belgium and France to take a hard look at just why Abdeslam was able to remain on the loose for so long under the noses of those turning over what they thought was every rock.
After the November bloodbath, there was talk of \"no go\" zones in major European cities -- areas, particularly Arab-dominated, where police have been unable to penetrate routinely.
The reality is that these zones are less places cops don't dare go than places where they get few useful results when they do show up.
'We do not understand'
The police, quietly, with sensitivity and understanding, with a deep knowledge of the languages and customs of each such neighborhood, need to be there all the time. And they're not.
More than 20 years ago, Count Alexandre de Marenches, longtime head of French intelligence, told me that the greatest threat to his nation's security was \"an entire nation living within our country whose language we do not speak, whose customs and religion, whose hopes and fears we do not understand.\"
He was referring, even then, to the Islamic communities that have only multiplied in recent years and promise to multiply even further with the arrival of thousands of new refugees from Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan. It's a question worth posing in the United States as well.
In the specific case of Abdeslam, there's the excuse that French-speaking and Flemish-speaking Belgian cops have difficulty communicating, and that neither group has much expertise in Arabic.
There are other issues -- the conflict, particularly in France, between domestic and international intelligence agencies, historically all too often at odds.
All these are issues worth an urgent look in America.
In the U.S., ISIL sympathizers can't simply jump into a car as in Iraq or Syria, pass porous frontiers and in a matter of days wind up in sympathetic communities only blocks from the targets of potentially deadly attacks.
Even so, America, too, must understand enemies sheltering among us. Complacency in the U.S. could be as deadly a sin as ignorance in Europe.
David A. Andelman, a member of the USA TODAY Board of Contributors, is co-author with Count de Marenches of The Fourth World War: Diplomacy and Espionage in the Age of Terrorism.
Word count: 789
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
