"Likening the fight against terrorism to the Cold War and the battle against Nazism, Donald Trump pledged Monday to tighten restrictions on immigration from Muslim countries and assess allies based on their commitment to defeat \"radical Islam.\"
\"All actions should be oriented around this goal, and any country which shares this goal will be our ally,\" Trump said in what aides billed as a major foreign policy address. \"Very important: Some don't share this goal. We cannot always choose our friends, but we can never fail to recognize our enemies.\"
The Republican nominee declared his opposition to \"nation building\" and other efforts to spread democracy in the Middle East. He attacked the Obama administration -- particularly former secretary of State Hillary Clinton -- for policies on nations such as Iraq, Iran, Libya, Syria and Egypt.
Trump blamed President Obama and Clinton for the rise of the Islamic State, the Middle-East-based extremist group also known as ISIL or ISIS.
\"The Obama-Clinton foreign policy has unleashed ISIS, destabilized the Middle East and put the nation of Iran -- which chants, 'Death to America' -- in a dominant position,\" Trump told an invited audience at Youngstown State University in Ohio, a key state in his election battle against his Democratic opponent in November.
He said Clinton \"lacks the mental and physical stamina to take on ISIS and all of the many adversaries we face.\"
Trump advocated a foreign policy overhaul in three general areas: diplomacy, immigration, and national security (particularly cyber security).
Trump pledged to work with any country willing to commit to help defeat \"radical Islamic terrorism\" and criticized Obama and Clinton for their reluctance to use that term.
That list of allies would include Russia. Trump proposed a closer relationship with Russia to fight the Islamic State, telling the crowd, \"Wouldn't that be a good thing?\"
Many of the things Trump attacked -- including the Iraq invasion, the Libya intervention and the Iraq withdrawal under Obama -- are developments he has supported in past years.
Credit: David Jackson, @djusatoday, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Gerald Herbert, AP
Word count: 374
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
