"PARIS -- The French justice minister, one of the most outspoken and progressive voices in the government, resigned on Wednesday after a clash over a proposal to strip the citizenship of French-born dual nationals convicted of terrorism.
President François Hollande's office said in a statement that he had accepted the resignation of the minister, Christiane Taubira, a native of French Guiana. She had held the position since Mr. Hollande's election in 2012 and had disagreed with his government on several issues.
The statement said that Mr. Hollande had expressed \"gratitude\" for Ms. Taubira's service and that she had reformed the justice system with \"conviction, determination and talent.\"
At a news conference at the Justice Ministry, she said, \"I am leaving the government over a major political disagreement.\"
\"I am choosing to be faithful to myself, to my commitments, to my fights,\" she added.
Ms. Taubira was widely known as an independent spirit with a more leftist bent than that of the Socialist government.
Before the news conference, she said on Twitter that she was \"proud\" of her time at the Justice Ministry. \"Sometimes to resist is to stay, sometimes to resist is to leave,\" she wrote in a second post.
The proposal to strip the citizenship of French-born dual nationals convicted of terrorism was put forward by Mr. Hollande in the aftermath of the attacks in the Paris area in November that killed 130 people.
Prime Minister Manuel Valls, who was presenting the proposal on Wednesday at the National Assembly, France's lower house of Parliament, said that the legislation would make no reference to dual citizenship and that it would only apply to the most serious crimes and offenses.
Mr. Valls also emphasized that France would not make anybody stateless, suggesting that the stripping of citizenship would in practice apply only to those with dual citizenship, even if it did not specifically say so.
Mr. Valls said the bill would make it possible to strip French citizens of some or all of their civic rights, like the right to vote, regardless of how many citizenships they held.
Opinion polls show that most French people support the measure. Yet it has proved deeply divisive for the left, where many, including Ms. Taubira, said it discriminated among French citizens and was largely symbolic because it was unlikely to deter any would-be terrorists.
Ms. Taubira said at her news conference that France was facing a \"serious\" and \"unpredictable\" terrorist threat, adding that \"we know how to fight it.\"
\"But I believe that we mustn't grant it any victory, neither military, nor diplomatic, nor political, nor symbolic.\"
The proposal, which requires an amendment to the French Constitution, is part of a bill that also aims to give a constitutional framework to the law governing the state of emergency.
Mr. Hollande declared a state of emergency immediately after the Nov. 13 attacks. He is expected to extend it for another three months after the first three-month period expires on Feb. 26.
France's top administrative court upheld the state of emergency on Wednesday, rejecting a request by the League for Human Rights to suspend it and arguing that the threat of terrorist attacks still loomed.
Ms. Taubira, a skilled orator who peppers her speeches with lyrical flourishes and erudite references, was one of the few black, female politicians within a prominent ministry in the French government. She ran for president in 2002.
She was an advocate for women and minorities, and she was best known for championing the legalization of same-sex marriage in 2013, which elevated her status on the left as a defender of progressive values. Mr. Hollande's statement praised her \"major role\" in passing the legislation.
But her role in the same-sex marriage debate also made her a target for the right and far right, and criticism of Ms. Taubira and her policies was a cornerstone of opposition to the Socialist government.
Guillaume Larrivé, a spokesman for former President Nicolas Sarkozy's conservative party, declared that she had been the \"worst justice minister of the Fifth Republic.\"
Marine Le Pen, the president of the far-right National Front party, said in a statement that Ms. Taubira's departure was \"good news\" for France and that her time at the Justice Ministry had proved \"absolutely disastrous\" for the country.
Mr. Hollande nominated Jean-Jacques Urvoas, a Socialist lawmaker from Brittany, to replace Ms. Taubira. Mr. Urvoas is a close ally of Mr. Valls's and hews more closely to the law-and-order line favored by the prime minister.
Mr. Urvoas was a strong promoter of a bill passed last year that vastly expanded the surveillance abilities of French intelligence services, legislation that Ms. Taubira said she would have demonstrated against had she not been in the government.
Ms. Taubira was scheduled to land in Washington on Wednesday evening for a three-day visit to the United States that was to include meetings with Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch and with representatives from the Black Lives Matter movement.
The Justice Ministry said the official visit would be canceled in light of her resignation, but New York University confirmed that she would still be attending a conference there Friday, suggesting that she was traveling as a private citizen.
\"I can't stand having a boss,\" Ms. Taubira told The New York Times in a 2013 interview. \"My conscience is my boss, and my conscience dictates rules that are extremely, I'd say, grand -- they're rough but beautiful.\"
Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.
Photograph
Christiane Taubira On Wednesday, After She Resigned As France's Justice Minister Because of a Policy Clash. (Photograph by Christian Hartmann/Reuters)
Word count: 974
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 28, 2016"
