"While terror attacks tend to have a short-term negative impact on stocks, there are potential \"second-order effects\" of terrorism that could spook investors and hurt stocks longer term.
Some possibilities: the rise of populist politicians with a nationalist streak, new laws in the name of security that lean isolationist and hurt trade and reactionary policies that undo globalization.
The latest terror attack in Brussels, which comes on the heels of the Paris massacre in November, for example, could boost the odds of Great Britain voting to exit the European Union.
It could also prompt governments around the globe to turn inward, to build walls, close borders that were once open, push laws that halt immigration or slap tariffs on imports to protect domestic businesses, to name just a few.
In a modern world defined by global commerce, any shift in the other direction is likely to be viewed as a negative by investors.
\"It is the second-order effect of terror that could be the more important impact, namely if it affects government policy on business,\" says Jim McDonald, chief investment strategist at Northern Trust, who wrote a report that added \"populist politics\" to the list of risks facing stocks.
\"If we have more terror attacks it could lead to a greater isolationist approach, not only in the U.S. but more importantly in Europe. The possibility of populist policies gaining power and leading to a disruption of trade would not be well received by financial markets,\" he said.
The biggest short-term risk related to the recent attacks is it could give British voters another reason to cut ties with the 28-nation European Union when the referendum vote comes up in late June, says Axel Merk, chief investment officer at Merk Investments.
The same trap could hurt the U.S. \"Both parties have candidates looking for the U.S. to disengage from the world, and to slow or stop free-trade agreements,\" says Brad McMillan, chief investment officer at Commonwealth Financial Network.
\"While there have certainly been costs, free trade has been on the whole a net benefit to the U.S. economy. Should the terrorist attacks push the U.S. to disengage from trade, or even worse enact policies such as tariffs which could ignite a trade war, it will not be only the U.S. economy that suffers,\" he says.
Credit: Adam Shell, @adamshell, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Christopher Furlong, Getty Images
Word count: 425
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
