"Paris attacks suspect Salah Abdeslam was charged Wednesday with terrorist murders and using bombs and weapons for the deadly November assaults that killed 130 people, his lawyer said.
The preliminary charges were filed in Paris after Abdeslam, 26, was extradited from Belgium to the French capital Wednesday. After the court hearing, he was sent to Fleury-Merogis, a high-security prison 19 miles south of Paris, attorney Frank Berton said.
Abdeslam, the last known survivor of those suspected of carrying out the Nov. 13 attacks, will be held in isolation in a special camera-equipped cell until his next hearing May 20.
Berton said his client has said he \"would explain himself at some later date,\" the Associated Press reported.
The Belgium Federal Prosecutor's Office said Abdeslam was delivered to the French authorities under a European arrest warrant accusing him of helping plan and execute the Paris attacks at restaurants, a music hall and a sports stadium outside the city. The Islamic State claimed responsibility.
Abdeslam, a Belgian citizen, was on the run for months before being captured in the Brussels neighborhood of Molenbeek on March 18 -- four days before terrorist attacks there killed 32 people at the Brussels Airport and at a subway stop.
A note found on a computer abandoned by one of the terrorists in the Brussels attacks suggested that the arrest of Abdeslam, who had links to the Belgian extremists, led them to move ahead the date of the attacks.
Abdeslam told Belgian authorities he was supposed to kill himself during the Paris attacks but abandoned his suicide vest and fled the country, entering Belgium the same night.
Sven Mary, Abdeslam's Belgian lawyer, described his client as having \"the intelligence of an empty ashtray\" and as \"a little jerk among Molenbeek's little delinquents, more a follower than a leader,\" in a profile published Wednesday by the Liberation newspaper.
Mary added, \"He is the perfect example of the GTA (Grand Theft Auto) generation who thinks he lives in a video game,\" according to the newspaper.
Credit: Jane Onyanga-Omara, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo JEREMY LEMPIN, European Pressphoto Agency
Word count: 377
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
