"Major cities across the U.S. scrambled to harden their security nets after the latest terror attacks -- this time, in Brussels -- left dozens dead and renewed fear that urban transit stations are easy and attractive targets for suicide bombers.
Police in Boston, Chicago, and Los Angeles reported stepped-up security at rail stations and airports. New York City Mayor Bill De Blasio pledged that New Yorkers \"will not live in fear.\"
\"NYPD is on increased alert across our city,\" De Blasio said. \"While we take this threat seriously our lives will continue today in honor of those lost to terrorism.\"
Intelligence officials assured Americans that there is no evidence of a similar attack being planned here, but experts say the USA's relatively open transportation system could make it vulnerable to attacks like the ones that struck Brussels.
The Islamic State claimed responsibility for Tuesday's urban assault in Belgium, which brought the capital city's airport and downtown metro to a terrifying halt, killing dozens as screaming commuters dived for cover from shards of bomb shrapnel.
Police at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey increased security at each of the region's three area airports -- John F. Kennedy, LaGuardia and Newark -- and at bridges, tunnels and bus terminals.
At Manhattan's busy Penn Station, police checked morning commuters' briefcases and backpacks. The city's massive police department deployed additional officers throughout the city, mainly to crowded areas and busy transit locations \"out of an abundance of caution\" and to provide \"public reassurance,\" New York Police Department (NYPD) spokesman J. Peter Donald said.
Police Commissioner William Bratton said a special police unit is now permanently assigned to the Times Square subway station, but the Tuesday deployment was planned in advance of the Brussels assault.
Worldwide, terrorists have targeted railway systems for more than a decade: In 2004, they bombed a commuter train in Madrid, killing 191 people and injuring 2,000. In 2005, suicide bombers killed 52 people in the London Underground and on a double-decker bus.
Like many nationwide, New York's transit system is vulnerable. The city's massive, five-borough subway system, which in 2014 carried more than 1.75 billion riders, or about 5.6 million riders each weekday, features more than 1,000 entrances and exits. That makes it much more open than the typical U.S. airport, with its checkpoints and tight security, said Rep. Pete King, R-N.Y.
\"We can never have the same level of security on trains as we do on planes,\" said King, who supports more railway canine units and random searches.
Nationwide, many more passengers travel by rail than plane -- five times as many daily, a November report by the Congressional Research Service found. In 2014, passengers took 5 billion rides on subway, commuter and intercity trains.
By comparison, travelers take about 730 million airline flights each year.
If cities moved to screen even a portion of those rail passengers, experts say, the costs could be high.
The Transportation Security Administration estimates that it spends $7 on screening for each airline passenger, a prohibitive cost for any subway or commuter rail system, said Brian Michael Jenkins, director of the National Surface Transportation Security Center at the Mineta Transportation Institute.
Add a 10- to 15-minute wait -- shorter than what is typical in today's airport security lines -- and \"it would destroy public surface transportation,\" he said.
Increasing the number of security personnel does cause terrorists \"to back off,\" Jenkins said, noting research on terrorists who survived their own attacks. But he said educational campaigns encouraging travelers and transportation workers to report suspicious activity also work.
Actually, said Jeff Price, a transportation security expert and associate professor at Metro State University in Denver, such screening could also make rail systems more attractive terrorism targets.
Large crowds backed up at crammed train stations waiting to get through checkpoints create bigger targets.
\"There would have to be massive changes in facilities throughout the U.S., and ultimately, we would just end up creating more crowds for bombers to attack,\" he said.
Instead, the TSA posts high-profile canine teams with local police in subway and train stations at a small fraction of the cost teams stationed at airports.
In Washington, D.C., the city's subway system announced it would conduct more canine sweeps and patrols Tuesday. The city's police chief, Cathy Lanier, said that police in the nation's capital are \"at a heightened state of alert at all times,\" but she urged local residents to be vigilant in wake of the attacks and report anything unusual. \"If you see something, say something,\" she said.
That tracks with a Mineta Transportation Institute study of worldwide incidents, which found that nearly one in 10 thwarted bombings on trains, buses and ferries was discovered by passengers or workers before the bomb detonated.
\"The reason for that appears to be the effectiveness of these see-something, say-something campaigns,\" Mineta's Jenkins said.
In Chicago on Tuesday, Mayor Rahm Emanuel said the city remained on alert, but he stressed that there were \"no known threats.\" Police increased their presence at airports, transportation hubs and other high-profile locations, Police Department spokesman Anthony Guglielmi said.
Emanuel said Chicago \"will continue standing with the Belgian people both today and in the difficult days ahead as they move forward in their healing process.\"
Boston officials strengthened security on public transit systems and at airports, Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker said.
Boston Police Commissioner William Evans said while there was no specific threat in Boston, \"all department personnel are advised to be extremely vigilant as they go about their duties and to pay particular attention to all transportation hubs.\"
\"We will do whatever is necessary to support our friends in Belgium,\" said President Obama, who was visiting Havana.
Contributing: Gregory Korte, USA TODAY
Illustration
graphic
Word count: 1007
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
