"As a long time non-partisan congressional reporter and former professional translator, I cringed when I heard that \"Islamist\" had gone missing from French President Francois Holland's description of terrorism at a recent White House roundtable. Did the administration delete the audio translation from a video of the session by accident? On purpose? Was it blatant censorship? Maybe a severe case of political correctness, given that President Obama refuses to use or allow use of the term?
The administration blames a \"technical issue,\" and the audio was restored. Whatever the reason, a lapse like this is of particular concern when the guest is the president of an important ally.
I just hope the translator won't lose his or her job.
The translator's role is to relate as exactly as possible what has been said -- not to rewrite the text to a more politically correct version. Deciding which word to choose or even omit or add from an ongoing speech or an original text is a common dilemma for translators. I faced it many times when I worked as a translator at the United Nations in Geneva, at the 1984 Olympics, and as a non-advocate immigration journalist in Washington and South America for decades. It even once cost me a job.
It was during President George W. Bush's campaign to foment a \"war on terror.\" I was interviewing for a translating, news-writing job with a German news service when I was asked to translate a story from German into English. But the Germans did not use the word \"war\" (krieg); they use \"fight\" (kampf); they referred to the war on terror as the kampf gegan terrorismos.
I translated the phrase as \"fight against terrorism\" because the customers -- mainly business people in Singapore, Japan and China -- were paying the German news agency to translate German news stories with a German point of view. But my American editor was quite taken aback at my decision. I did not get the job.
For simultaneous interpreters, there is another choice to make about the issue of tonality. Protocol demands a speech be translated in a monotone. But often, the meaning of the words is in the tone. Should a simultaneous translator try to reflect that?
One can speculate on all the personal reasons Obama might want to avoid the term \"Islamic terrorist.\" Perhaps it is because both his biological father and his stepfather were Muslim. In Indonesia, Obama attended a Muslim school for a while, and many of his best friends in high school and college in the U.S. were Muslims. He knows Islam as a diverse, friendly, mostly peaceful religion. Hollande obviously does not have that background.
It's good for a translator to know some of the background of high-profile speakers to choose the most appropriate words. But no translation protocol allows deliberate changes to a speaker's words because they are deemed politically incorrect by the host. That's true especially when the host is the White House.
Margaret (Peggy) Sands Orchowski is congressional correspondent for Hispanic Outlook magazine.
Word count: 526
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
