"Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., took to the Senate floor just before noon Wednesday and vowed to speak as long as he physically could until the Senate takes action to address gun violence.
Murphy listed mass shootings and talked about expanding background checks for gun buyers and banning gun sales to people on terror watch lists. He said the failure of Congress to pass such measures has been particularly disappointing to him and other residents of Connecticut, where a shooter gunned down 20 children and six adults at Sandy Hook Elementary in 2012.
\"I can't tell you how hard it is to look into the eyes of the families of those little boys and girls who were killed in Sandy Hook and tell them that almost four years later, we've done nothing, nothing at all to reduce the likelihood that that will happen again to another family,\" Murphy said.
Murphy, who spoke well into the evening, was aided in chewing up time by a string of fellow Democratic senators who took turns asking him questions.
Democrats renewed their push for legislation to toughen gun laws after the shooting at the Pulse nightclub in Florida on Sunday that killed 49 people, plus the shooter, and injured 53. They have focused on a measure proposed by Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., that would ban gun sales to suspected terrorists, including those on watch lists.
Republican leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky has said he and his GOP colleagues are open to legislation that would ban such sales but only if it includes due process protections for individuals listed.
His party's presumptive nominee, Donald Trump, said he will meet with the National Rifle Association \"about not allowing people on the terrorist watch list, or the no-fly list, to buy guns.\"
Chris Cox, executive director of the NRA's Institute for Legislative Action, said the group backs delaying a sale until an investigation is completed and blocking a sale only after a court hearing. \"At the same time, due process protections should be put in place that allow law-abiding Americans who are wrongly put on a watchlist to be removed,\" Cox said.
Credit: Donovan Slack, @donovanslack, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Paul Morigi, Getty Images, for EPIX
Word count: 395
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
