"WASHINGTON -- When the United States became aware late last month of a video showing an American woman and a Canadian man pleading to be saved from their Taliban captors, the government did something it had not done well in the past.
Before the video became public, a new hostage team led by the Federal Bureau of Investigation quickly alerted the couple's families to brace for the chilling footage.
The effort reflected a sweeping change in how the government handles hostages, a shift ordered last year by President Obama after hostages' families complained of officials' callousness and poor communication. The new hostage team faces no small task as Americans continue to move through the world's many war zones.
Officials say that more than 70 hostages who are Americans or legal permanent residents of the United States have been freed since the revamped effort came together at the F.B.I. headquarters, but it is unclear whether there has been any change in the rate that captives have been rescued. Members of the F.B.I.-led team and their counterparts at the State Department are still trying to bring home more than a dozen people, officials said.
Last week, the Pentagon said that Navy SEAL personnel had led an unsuccessful raid in August to save an American university professor and his Australian colleague who were kidnapped recently in Afghanistan. Before that mission, the government spoke with the family of the American, a 60-year-old Pennsylvania man, whose fate remains unknown.
The improved communication in the cases of the professor and the missing couple underscores the administration's progress. Through the F.B.I.-led team, the government has tried to handle hostage situations with greater sensitivity, better coordination and quicker action toward a resolution. And while the administration has continued its policy of not paying ransoms, it has now pledged not to criminally charge families if they decide to pay one.
But the two cases are also a grim reminder of the work still to be done. It is one thing to reach out to families, but quite another to actually win a hostage's release.
The kidnapping of the couple held by the Taliban, Caitlan Coleman, 30, and her husband, Joshua Boyle, 33, has now bedeviled the government for nearly four years. Their situation shows the difficulty that officials face in trying to free hostages while dealing with emotionally strained families and their expectations of what the government can accomplish.
The couple were backpacking in Wardak Province, an insurgent stronghold near Kabul, in late 2012 when they were kidnapped. Ms. Coleman was pregnant with her first child at the time, officials said, and she later gave birth to a second child.
They have since become pawns in a tussle between Afghanistan, the United States and the Haqqani militant group, the Taliban faction that seized them.
In 2014, Anas Haqqani, a commander of the Haqqani network, was captured, and the Afghan government recently sentenced him to death. The group threatened to kill Ms. Coleman, Mr. Boyle and the children if the Afghans followed through with the execution. The United States is in a difficult position: Despite providing billions of dollars in aid to Afghanistan, it cannot dictate to Afghan courts what to do.
Ms. Coleman's family declined to comment. While they have rarely spoken to the news media, they told their local newspaper, The Patriot-News, in a statement in 2014 that \"we do not know what to do; we do not know where to turn.\"
Many of the government's changes since then have been largely bureaucratic, but the differences appear meaningful.
While the government in the past refused to share intelligence with families, they now get regular briefings. Officials said that hundreds of sensitive cables had been declassified as part of this effort.
Instead of tackling hostage cases on an ad hoc basis, officials from the Defense and State Departments, the Central Intelligence Agency and the Treasury Department -- part of the new group, which is known as the Hostage Recovery Fusion Cell -- now gather daily at the F.B.I. headquarters to discuss them. James O'Brien, the special presidential envoy for hostage affairs, and his deputy, Julia Nesheiwat, are also deeply involved in efforts to win the release of captives and stay in touch with the families.
In a statement, a spokeswoman for the fusion cell said, \"This is the interagency government coming together to bring home U.S. persons held captive overseas.\"
Perhaps most important, the government has designated officials -- many of them senior -- to talk with the families. During the period starting in mid-2014 when the Islamic State was beheading large numbers of captives, family members repeatedly complained that they did not know who in the American government was in charge or whom to call with questions. Many times, they received conflicting information.
Among the families who criticized the government's actions was that of the slain journalist James Foley. The family did not learn of his beheading in 2014 until being told by a reporter. Mr. Foley's mother accused the government of showing a lack of compassion and threatening prosecution if the family paid a ransom. She was not consulted before the military attempted a failed raid in Syria to save her son.
The improvements since then seemed to be clear to Sam Farran, 55, a security consultant who was freed last year after being abducted and brutalized in Yemen. \"My family says the F.B.I. was good,\" he said.
\"They were on the phone with them on a daily basis,\" he added. \"So that provided some relief that they were engaged. This is one good thing.\"
Mr. Farran said he wished, however, that the government had been able to provide family members with financial support as they struggled with bills while he was in captivity.
\"They could have offered more assistance to my family,\" he said. As for Mr. Farran, \"It has been a long recovery,\" he said.
Mr. Farran was one of at least three hostages in Yemen to be released since the new fusion cell was formed. A former Marine is still being held in the country, and another American died in November after he was detained at the airport in Sana, the capital.
David G. Bradley, the chairman and owner of Atlantic Media, who has worked closely with the families of hostages, including the Foleys, said that he had initially been deeply skeptical of the government's pledge to do better. But Mr. Bradley said he had seen \"a night and day difference\" in the government's response and a new sense of urgency.
But, he cautioned, \"the families of those being held hostage, of course, have only one measure of success: They want their kids home.\"
Representative Duncan D. Hunter, Republican of California and a member of the House Armed Services Committee, who has been critical of the government's handling of hostage situations in the past, acknowledged some improvements but said that the military or the intelligence agencies, not the F.B.I., should lead the effort.
\"To have any real success, the F.B.I. needs a lot of luck and good timing on its side, both of which shouldn't be the primary elements of hostage recovery strategy,\" Mr. Hunter said. \"If there's one benefit, it's family outreach and coordination. But that now needs to coincide with results.\"
A majority of the cases that the fusion cell has resolved have been kidnappings involving demands for small ransoms, including many in Africa and Latin America. The conclusions came quickly and quietly.
But there have also been hard-fought victories and frustrations in war-torn countries such as Afghanistan, Yemen, Iraq and Syria.
In January, for example, a Shiite militia seized three American contractors in Iraq and hid them in the Sadr City neighborhood north of Baghdad. American officials feared that the men would be handed over to Iran or sold off to another group.
Soon the United States persuaded Iraq to fight back, and Iraqi officials applied pressure on the militia by rounding up low-level members. Thirty-one days later, the contractors were released. The United States made no concessions and paid no ransom.
One of the contractors, Waiel El-Maadawy, 42, a former United States Army infantryman, said militia members had beaten him repeatedly and had performed mock executions while he was blindfolded. He prepared himself to be held much longer, he said.
\"Thirty-one days is hard to complain about if someone has been held for four years,\" he said in an interview. \"I am very thankful.\"
In April, the United States -- with help from the Czech Republic and Russia -- secured the release of Kevin Patrick Dawes, a freelance photographer who had been held in Syria for nearly four years.
In some cases, though, the United States has had no success. American officials have not been able to free Austin Tice, a journalist and former Marine officer, who disappeared in Syria in 2012.
The Syrian government has never publicly acknowledged holding Mr. Tice, but American officials believe that the release of Mr. Dawes by the Syrian authorities was a first step in getting Mr. Tice home. Mr. Dawes went missing in October 2012, but the Syrians did not admit to having him until late 2014.
The United States has also yet to determine what happened to Robert A. Levinson, a former F.B.I. agent and C.I.A. contractor who vanished on the Iranian island of Kish in 2007.
In Afghanistan, a 73-year-old man from Massachusetts who was taken hostage in 2014 remains unaccounted for. The man, whose name his family has asked not to be made public, had hoped to interview the leader of the Haqqani network. It could \"be a one-way trip, or, on the other hand, rather amazing...\" he wrote in an email before his disappearance.
As for Ms. Coleman and Mr. Boyle, the couple in the Taliban video, the United States knows they are still alive. The video had a silver lining: It was proof of life.
But it was also foreboding.
\"They will execute us, women and children included,\" Mr. Boyle said.
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.
AuthorAffiliation
ADAM GOLDMAN Follow Adam Goldman on Twitter @adamgoldmanNYT.
Credit: ADAM GOLDMAN; Kitty Bennett contributed research.
Photograph
Left, Caitlan Coleman and Her Husband, Joshua Boyle, in a Video Asked for Release From Their Taliban Captors. They Were Kidnapped in 2012. Their Mothers, Linda Boyle, Above Left, and Lyn Coleman, with a Photograph of the Couple. (Photographs by Site Intelligence Group, Via Associated Press; Bill Gorman/Associated Press) (A16)
Word count: 1782
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 12, 2016"
