"ST. CLOUD, Minn. -- Nearly eight years before Dahir Adan was shot dead by an off-duty police officer and accused of stabbing 10 people at a mall, the police stormed into his family's apartment here to break up a fight between two of his brothers.
\"We could hear a lot of screaming and yelling and all in a Somali language,\" a St. Cloud officer wrote in his 2008 report on the episode.
The encounter ended with an officer tackling one brother and threatening to use a Taser, the report says, and another brother claiming he had been whipped with a belt and nearly stabbed with a fork by his sibling.
When the mayhem subsided, the police asked Mr. Adan, who was just 12 at the time and apparently not involved in the fight, to help interpret for his father. But the officer wrote, \"It was not a good translation, nor do I think he understood very well.\"
That long-ago episode provides a lens on Mr. Adan's infrequent and benign encounters with law enforcement until Saturday's rampage.
By acquaintances' accounts, he was a successful student, enjoyed playing basketball and worked part time as a security guard.
Much remains unknown about Mr. Adan, whose family and friends, part of this city's large but insular Somali community, have said little about him and have declined repeated requests for interviews. The Islamic State has claimed responsibility for the attack, and the F.B.I. has said it was investigating it as a \"potential act of terrorism.\" The police have said Mr. Adan invoked Allah during the episode, and asked at least one victim if he was Muslim.
But Chief William Blair Anderson of the St. Cloud police said that no evidence had been found linking Mr. Adan, who was 20, to terrorist groups, even after multiple searches.
\"We're still chasing down leads,\" Chief Anderson said on Tuesday morning in an interview at the police station here. \"We are trying to find out any and everything we can about this individual.\"
Later Tuesday, the F.B.I. announced that its Joint Terrorism Task Force was taking the lead in the investigation.
\"Motive is a primary focus of the investigation,\" said Kyle Loven, an F.B.I. spokesman.
Leaders in St. Cloud's Somali community, who have spoken to the family, have said that Mr. Adan was wearing a security guard uniform because he was scheduled to work at his part-time job on Saturday, and that he claimed to be going to the mall, Crossroads Center, to get a new iPhone.
At the same apartment where the police arrested one of his brothers in 2008, family members had gathered on Tuesday afternoon for a large meal. A woman who answered the door did not identify herself but said: \"The last four days have been very hard. We won't talk to you. We have a lawyer.\" She quickly shut the door.
Neighbors at the plain brick apartment complex, most of whom appeared to be Somali, also declined to speak about Mr. Adan.
The family's lawyer, Abdulwahid Osman, declined on Tuesday to speak about the case or make relatives or friends available for interviews, leaving only snippets of official records and the statements of family acquaintances to fill in the details of Mr. Adan's life. The family had previously released a statement extending sympathies to the victims and asking that people not rush to judgment.
Mr. Adan had no serious contacts with the police, the authorities have said. At 14, records show, he was issued a trespassing warning and told not to visit one apartment complex for a year.
And last month, a Stearns County sheriff's deputy pulled him over in St. Cloud and cited him for not having proof of insurance.
Somali leaders have said Mr. Adan was born at a refugee camp in Africa and came to the United States as a toddler, settling first in North Dakota, where Fargo Public Schools confirmed that he had attended class starting in 2001 as a kindergartner. He remained enrolled there through September 2005, when he was in the fourth grade and his family moved to St. Cloud.
Mr. Adan performed well in school, family friends said. After graduating from high school, Mr. Adan enrolled at St. Cloud State University, where he had hoped to major in information systems but was never admitted into the program.
Mr. Adan was never listed as a member of any student groups at the university, officials said. And though he stayed at St. Cloud State through spring 2016, he did not enroll in fall classes.
Photograph
Chief William Blair Anderson of the St. Cloud, Minn., Police at a News Conference On Sunday. \"We're Still Chasing Down Leads,\" He Said On Tuesday. (Photograph by Jason Wachter/St. Cloud Times, Via Associated Press)
Word count: 810
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 21, 2016"
