"82 people have been accused by American officials of trying to help the Islamic State. Here is how far they got.
None of the people accused of plotting attacks received specific direction from the Islamic State abroad, according to the evidence presented in legal documents and other public information that were analyzed by The New York Times and the Center on National Security at the Fordham University School of Law.
The Islamic State has demonstrated an ability to coordinate attacks in Europe from the Middle East. But the United States has yet to see any of those types of attacks. Instead, attacks in the United States have been \"lone wolf\" strikes.
\"While ISIS remains a brutal and lethal force abroad, its operational reach to the United States has been negligible at best,\" the center's director, Karen J. Greenberg, said. In addition, nearly half of the arrests followed undercover investigations by the F.B.I., and most of the individuals were caught early on.
Although the domestic plots are alarming and increasing in frequency, Ms. Greenberg said that the driving force among those in the United States inspired by the Islamic State had been foreign fighting. A third of those accused were allegedly discussing or plotting an attack in the United States; the rest were allegedly trying to travel abroad to fight for the Islamic State, or trying to help others travel.
All told, the people charged with plotting attacks or trying to travel to fight for the Islamic State lived in nearly two dozen states. For the most part, they were not clustered together, although there were about a dozen from a Somali enclave in Minneapolis.
Almost all of the accused were American citizens or permanent residents. About 40 percent had converted to Islam. Nearly three-quarters were under 30, and all but 11 were male.
\"ISIS, in addition to being a force in the Middle East, is essentially a global gang preying upon alienated youth and providing an identity for self-selecting men and women who are isolated, angry and, at the same time, in search of a mission in life,\" Ms. Greenberg said.
The 82 can be broken down into two groups:
(Six fell into both groups.)
People who plotted an attack in the U.S
According to charges filed by the F.B.I.:
32 expressed interest in carrying out an attack on American soil.
28 took steps to carry out an attack.
17 were being watched by the F.B.I. as they made plans for an attack.
Includes Emanuel L. Lutchman, charged with planning a New Year's Eve machete attack in upstate New York.
5 were in communication with a member of the Islamic State.
4 believed they were in contact with the Islamic State but were actually talking to an undercover F.B.I. agent.
2 carried out an attack in Garland, Tex., in May 2015. Elton Simpson and Nadir Soofi were shot to death by the police before killing anyone.
2 carried out an attack in San Bernardino, Calif., in December, killing 14 and wounding 22 others. Syed Rizwan Farook and Tashfeen Malik were killed in a shootout with the police hours later.
People who wanted to fight for ISIS overseas.
According to charges filed by the F.B.I.:
56 wanted to travel abroad to fight for the Islamic State or help someone else do so.
37 took steps to travel to Iraq
28 were arrested in the United States on their way to a flight.
The Mississippi newlyweds Jaelyn Delshaun Young and Muhammad Oda Dakhlalla unwittingly made travel plans with undercover federal agents on social media. The plans included disguising a trip to Syria via Greece and Turkey as a honeymoon.
5 traveled abroad with the intent to join the Islamic State, but were caught.
The F.B.I. said Asher Abid Khan returned home to Texas after his family sent him false information that his mother was ill. He had not yet joined ISIS.
3 joined the Islamic State in Syria.
Two were from Minnesota's Somali community.
Photograph
Photos
Word count: 684
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 5, 2016"
