"WASHINGTON -- The Putin policy in Syria is clear enough as the encirclement of rebel-held Aleppo proceeds and tens of thousands more Syrians flee toward the Turkish border. It is to entrench the brutal government of Bashar al-Assad by controlling the useful part of Syrian territory, bomb the moderate opposition into submission, block any possibility of Western-instigated regime change, use diplomatic blah-blah in Geneva as cover for changing the facts on the ground and, maybe fifth or sixth down the list, strengthen the Syrian Army to the point it may one day confront the murderous jihadist stronghold of the Islamic State.
The troubling thing is that the Putin policy on Syria has become hard to distinguish from the Obama policy.
Sure, the Obama administration still pays lip service to the notion that Assad is part of the problem and not the solution, and that if the Syrian leader survives through some political transition period he cannot remain beyond that. But these are words. It is President Vladimir Putin and Russia who are \"making the weather\" in Syria absent any corresponding commitment or articulable policy from President Obama.
Aleppo, Syria's largest city, is now virtually encircled by the Syrian Army. A war that has already produced a quarter of a million dead, more than 4.5 million refugees, some 6.5 million internally displaced individuals and the destabilization of Europe through a massive influx of terrorized people is about to see further abominations as Aleppo agonizes.
Aleppo may prove to be the Sarajevo of Syria. It is already the Munich.
By which I mean that the city's plight today -- its exposure to Putin's whims and a revived Assad's pitiless designs -- is a result of the fecklessness and purposelessness over almost five years of the Obama administration. The president and his aides have hidden at various times behind the notions that Syria is marginal to core American national interests; that they have thought through the downsides of intervention better than others; that the diverse actors on the ground are incomprehensible or untrustworthy; that there is no domestic or congressional support for taking action to stop the war or shape its outcome; that there is no legal basis for establishing \"safe areas\" or taking out Assad's air power; that Afghanistan and Iraq are lessons in the futility of projecting American power in the 21st century; that Syria will prove Russia's Afghanistan as it faces the ire of the Sunni world; and that the only imperative, whatever the scale of the suffering or the complete evisceration of American credibility, must be avoidance of another war in the Middle East.
Where such feeble evasions masquerading as strategy lead is to United States policy becoming Putin's policy in Syria, to awkward acquiescence to Moscow's end game and to embarrassed shrugs encapsulating the wish that -- perhaps, somehow, with a little luck -- Putin may crush ISIS.
Obama's Syrian agonizing, his constant what-ifs and recurrent \"what then?\" have also lead to the slaughter in Paris and San Bernardino. They have contributed to a potential unraveling of the core of the European Union as internal borders eliminated on a free continent are re-established as a response to an unrelenting refugee tide -- to which the United States has responded by taking in around 2,500 Syrians since 2012, or about 0.06 percent of the total.
\"The Syrian crisis is now a European crisis,\" a senior European diplomat told me. \"But the president is not interested in Europe.\" That is a fair assessment of the first postwar American leader for whom the core trans-Atlantic alliance was something to be dutifully upheld rather than emotionally embraced.
Syria is now the Obama administration's shame, a debacle of such dimensions that it may overshadow the president's domestic achievements.
Obama's decision in 2013, at a time when ISIS scarcely existed, not to uphold the American \"red line\" on Assad's use of chemical weapons was a pivotal moment in which he undermined America's word, incurred the lasting fury of Sunni Persian Gulf allies, shored up Assad by not subjecting him to serious one-off punitive strikes and opened the way for Putin to determine Syria's fate.
Putin policy is American policy because the United States has offered no serious alternative. As T.S. Eliot wrote after Munich in 1938, \"We could not match conviction with conviction, we had no ideas with which we could either meet or oppose the ideas opposed to us.\" Syria has been the bloody graveyard of American conviction.
It is too late, as well as pure illusion, to expect significant change in Obama's Syria policy. Aleppo's agony will be drawn out. But the president should at least do everything in his power, as suggested in a report prepared by Michael Ignatieff at the Harvard Kennedy School, to \"surge\" the number of Syrian refugees taken in this year to 65,000 from his proposed 10,000. As the report notes, \"If we allow fear to dictate policy, terrorists win.\"
Putin already has.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
AuthorAffiliation
ROGER COHEN You can follow me on Twitter or join me on Facebook.
Word count: 880
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 9, 2016"
