"An operative for Al Qaeda's affiliate in Yemen who was trained in bomb-making by Anwar al-Awlaki and agreed to carry out an attack targeting Americans and Israelis at Heathrow Airport in London was sentenced to 40 years in prison on Friday in Manhattan.
The operative, Minh Quang Pham, 33, never carried out the attack after returning home to Britain in summer 2011, and in a letter to the judge, he said he had only agreed to the plot in order to get out of Yemen and return home. Mr. Pham, who was extradited from Britain to the United States last year, pleaded guilty in January to three terrorism-related charges.
But the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, said Mr. Pham had not carried out the attack because he knew he was under surveillance by the authorities after returning to Britain.
Mr. Pham traveled secretly to Yemen in 2010, swore allegiance to the terrorist group, known as Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, or A.Q.A.P., and worked on its online propaganda publication, Inspire.
Under questioning by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, he said that while he was in Yemen, he approached Mr. Awlaki, an American-born radical Muslim cleric who had become A.Q.A.P.'s leading English-language propagandist, and volunteered to \"sacrifice himself\" in a suicide attack upon returning to Britain.
He said Mr. Awlaki taught him how to mix chemicals to make an explosive device, and even showed him how to tape bolts around the bomb to act as deadly shrapnel when the device exploded. Mr. Awlaki had also said to target the airport attack on arrivals from the United States or Israel.
The judge, Alison J. Nathan of Federal District Court, said she agreed with the government's position that Mr. Pham had intended to conduct the bombing and condemned his role in what she called a \"murderous plot.\"
She said Mr. Pham had been a \"trusted, skilled and, for a time, dedicated participant\" in A.Q.A.P, and that she believed aspects of that continued even after he returned to Britain.
The government had suggested a 50-year sentence. Anna M. Skotko, a prosecutor, told the judge that there was no evidence Mr. Pham had disavowed his allegiance to the terrorist group.
\"He was a full-grown, well-educated adult,\" she said. \"He was not a naïve child who lost his way and was looking for a group of friends.\" She said Mr. Pham chose to go to Yemen \"because he wanted to martyr himself.\"
\"He chose to go there,\" she said, \"because he wanted to cause destruction in the West, and that has remained with him to this day.\"
Mr. Pham, weeping at one point, told the judge that he had made a \"very serious mistake.\"
\"My thinking was wrong at the time,\" he said, adding, \"All I can say is I have reformed.\"
Mr. Pham, who was born in Vietnam, lived in Britain since childhood. His lawyer, Bobbie C. Sternheim, had asked the judge to impose a 30-year sentence, the minimum.
Ms. Sternheim noted that her client had willingly spoken to the F.B.I., had owned up to his mistakes and had not engaged in violence when he returned to Britain. She added, \"We should be hopeful that people who make mistakes can reform.\"
Judge Nathan, before imposing the sentence, noted that Mr. Pham, in his letter, said he had renounced terrorism and extreme ideology. \"I don't know whether these statements represent Mr. Pham's true beliefs,\" the judge said. \"I hope that they do.\"
Photograph
Minh Quang Pham
Word count: 606
Copyright New York Times Company May 28, 2016"
