"Thursday evening, Eric Heinrich and five of his closest friends did what they have done every year for the past 15 years: They met at Breitscheidplatz Christmas market to drink mugs of warm, spiced German wine.
\"This attack is not going to change my life. I will still go to work, soccer games, clubs, meet my friends,\" Heinrich, 34, an aeronautical engineer, said as the festive market reopened three days after a truck rampage that killed 12 people and injured 48. \"These attacks always try to divide us, but they always bring people closer together, not farther apart.\"
Berliners such as Heinrich and his friends braved cold, light rain to show their defiance of Monday night's attack, even as the hunt went on for Anis Amri, 24, a Tunisian national whose identity papers and fingerprints were found inside the truck.
\"We weren't sure whether it was the right thing to do at first, to come down here,\" said Karsten Mueller, one of Heinrich's friends. \"We had some discussions about it.\"
Except for some makeshift memorials laden with candles, flowers and homemade signs, all evidence of the truck and the havoc it unleashed had been cleared away. The paths between the wooden booths and stalls may not have been as busy as would usually be expected a few days before Christmas, but visitors tried to get on with the business of being as merry as possible.
\"No, no, no -- not scared or nervous. Appreciative,\" said Ansaldi Bartolo, 68, a retired cook who examined some of the notes left for the victims at the market. Bartolo lives nearby. He had been at the market Saturday and Sunday with his family. They had considered coming Monday as well but decided against it.
To emphasize his point that Berliners would not be intimidated by this attack, Bartolo clenched both his fists and raised them toward the sky.
Across the road, about half a dozen large police vans idled, and concrete barriers lined the market's entire road-facing perimeter. Inside the market, some of the customary bright lights were dimmed, and there was no evidence of the party music that can usually be heard. Instead, a band quietly played Amazing Grace.
The slightly somber mood did not diminish the seasonal smells: Obviously, there was sausage. There is at every German Christmas market. There were also deep-fried potato pancakes topped with applesauce, cream-covered waffles with a snowdrift of sugar, gingerbread, fruitcake and chocolate-covered marzipan.
Credit: Kim Hjelmgaard, @khjelmgaard, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Kim Hjelmgaard, USA TODAY
Word count: 448
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
