"ELIZABETH, N.J. -- A few minutes after 7 o'clock, the evening sky over the train station, which was just the color of Tang, has settled to a deep purple. The rain that fell during the day on Monday has relented, finally. But the air is still sticky. Very, very sticky.
Every so often, a flood of people descend the stairs of the station here, arriving on trains from Newark and New York City, and scatter onto the plaza underneath and into the streets, swiftly clearing away. A much smaller crowd is left hanging back. They are waiting around the platform for the next train, or sitting on benches, one group talking trash about someone they all know who is not there. Several men have sneaked off to a dark crevice to drink beer, invisible until their aluminum cans clink against the pavement, giving away their location.
It was here, 24 hours earlier, that a man accused of placing the bombs that exploded on Saturday in the Chelsea section of Manhattan and in Seaside Park, N.J., is believed to have dumped a backpack with several explosive devices in one of the trash cans around the station. The backpack was found within a couple of hours, but by that point, the man, Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28, had set off in the direction of the bar in nearby Linden, where he was found and entered into a gun battle with the police before he was captured.
Investigators say Mr. Rahami, who had lived in the area for years, may have made it to the bar on foot. The trek is about three miles, give or take a few blocks depending on the route, and an effort to retrace his steps a day later shows it is a journey passing through a bustling commercial district, quiet stretches of family homes and an industrial corridor most likely barren of life after dark on a Sunday.
Below the elevated train tracks at the Elizabeth station, Salaam Ismial stood in the plaza on Monday evening looking like a politician out to press the flesh. He wore a tie and a gray suit, an American flag pinned to his lapel. He described himself as a community advocate; he was troubled that what happened would shed a negative light on his city, home to many immigrants, where he has lived for most of his life.
\"They think this is the homeland of homegrown terrorism,\" Mr. Ismial, 57, said of Elizabeth.
He repeats some details he heard about how the bag was found -- \"I'm hearing this on the street level,\" he said, \"not the news level\" -- and he came because he wanted to scope things out for himself and talk to people. Mr. Ismial is Muslim. He worships at a mosque a few blocks away. Mr. Rahami's actions, he said, were \"not a good representation of the Islamic community, and certainly not Islam.\"
The suspect was a \"young, stupid Muslim kid who got caught up in the idea of hatred of America and American ideals,\" he said. \"This hurts to the core.\"
Under the elevated platform are several arched underpasses, one with a stone walkway that is quiet and damp, seeming almost like a catacomb. But several paces away is Broad Street, and with it comes a burst of life.
A group of friends, laughing and ribbing one another, spills out of the bodega with a storefront trimmed with neon blue light. One of them says her name is Lisa Johnson; she is 20 and has lived in Elizabeth all her life. She was around the night before. \"Just mad cops,\" she recalled.
It is around 8 p.m., and the day on Broad Street appears to be coming to a close for most, if not everyone. The thoroughfare is lined with businesses, many already with their doors locked -- shoe stores and discount stores and the dress shop where mannequins in sequined gowns and thick eyeliner peer through a metal grate. The shopkeeper at a vape store closes up wearing the pair of sunglasses he got in New York with an electronic marquee; \"EXCLUSIVE VAPE AND GLASS\" scrolls over his eyes.
A little farther down is a church with a cemetery. Old headstones, smoothed by time, poke out of the earth like a jagged row of teeth. Three cats hide in the shadows behind them.
Past the courthouse, the sounds of cars are replaced by the chirp of crickets. There do not appear to be many people around, but the orb hanging off the corner of a general contractor's building is a reminder of the times we live in: a security camera. When you are conscious of their presence, they seem to be everywhere.
And, it turns out, the area is not as dead as it seemed: A woman's emotional message in Spanish, sounding almost like a wail, seeps through a white door adorned only with block letter stickers that spell \"El Shaddai Community Center.\" \"We cannot be desecrated people when we're living in this world, God,\" she says, before a passing train drowns her out.
The trail leads to a street lined with houses. They are modest and almost all have siding that, in this light, appears to be a similar shade of gray. But the yards are tidy and some are decorated. The only indication that Elizabeth has given way to Linden is a sign in a vacant lot admonishing people to pick up after their dogs, an instruction that has been flagrantly ignored.
It is possible to catch glimpses of how people along the street go about their evening: The sounds of news in Spanish or dishes being washed escapes through open windows; the blue light from a big-screen television fills a living room window, with the silhouette of a person standing in front of it; and just beyond the houses, peek in the side door of a bowling alley, and a woman with a shock of white hair and a man in a baseball cap huddle close on stools at the concession stand, sharing a Pepsi.
The homestretch is mostly an industrial corridor: some auto body shops, a toner supplier, an office of some kind where the light is still on and an older man with no shirt on sits at a desk. Bob Petty stands outside a red-brick building in a shower cap and a white uniform he borrowed from his boss. It is a ricotta factory, where he has worked for three months.
Mr. Petty knows Mr. Rahami and his family, he said, or at least he went to their chicken restaurant once or twice a week. He had thought Mr. Rahami was friendly. \"He'd give you anything you wanted on credit,\" he recalled. \"If you didn't have the money, he'd still give it to you.\"
Closer to the bar, Judi Zabita pulls her sedan to the side of the road. She has her mother, her sister and her friend in the car with her. They have gone to the train station, they plan to go to the hospital, and now they are trying to get to Merdie's Tavern, where Mr. Rahami was spotted. She says they are taking their own \"version of the TMZ bus tour\" of celebrity spots around Los Angeles.
\"She wanted to understand how a terrorist could be so close to us,\" Ms. Zabita said of her mother. \"We're going through the whole chain of events.\"
They will not be able to get any closer. A strip of police tape and a police vehicle block Elizabeth Avenue in Linden. An officer who raised his hand for some overtime is on a 7 p.m. to 7 a.m. shift, here to keep people from coming in and grumbling about the young woman who has left a house behind the police line to see her boyfriend, kissing him on the cheek.
Has the officer ever seen something like this before? He replied with a cool shrug. \"I used to work homicide.\"
The end of the trail is just beyond the tape, past a few buildings and across from a row of houses -- the damp, dark doorway where Mr. Rahami was found. He has been labeled by commentators on Twitter and elsewhere as incompetent for a suspected terrorist, relaxing while on the run and drifting off in a place where he could be seen the next morning.
But think of it this way: Feel the sensation of relief that comes when you sit for the first time after hours of walking, your feet aching in your boots. In that moment, it is a choice that can make all the sense in the world.
Photograph
The New Jersey Transit Station in Elizabeth, N.J., Where a Backpack Hid Several Devices.; a Lingerie Store Along the Path That Ahmad Khan Rahami Is Thought to Have Traveled.; an Officer Guarding the Scene Where Mr. Rahami Was Found Before His Arrest in Linden, N.J. (Photographs by Christian Hansen for the New York Times)
Word count: 1517
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 21, 2016"
