"U.S. warplanes carried out airstrikes in Libya on Monday, targeting Islamic State forces near their stronghold in the coastal city of Sirte, the Pentagon announced.
Libya's interim government requested the attack, Pentagon spokesman Peter Cook said. It was approved by President Obama.
The bombing runs targeted Islamic State fighters and their weapons. One of the targets was a tank, Cook said. Other vehicles were destroyed as well. There were no U.S. troops on the ground in Libya directing the strikes, Cook said. There have been teams of U.S. special operators rotating into Libya to assess the security situation and establish communications.
Two Air Force F-15s conducted the strikes.
The Islamic State has established a presence in war-torn Libya and in Afghanistan. They have been struck by U.S. warplanes in support of local ground forces in both countries. In February, an airstrike in Libya killed 49 fighters from the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS. The first U.S. strike occurred in November.
Additional airstrikes will continue as forces aligned with the Libyan Government of National Accord take ground from the Islamic State, Cook said. The attacks help deny the Islamic State territory in Libya that could be used to attack the United States and its allies, he said. There are up to 1,000 Islamic State fighters in Sirte, Cook said.
Last week, Army Gen. John Nicholson, commander of allied forces in Afghanistan, said five U.S. commandos were wounded while helping Afghan forces clear Islamic State fighters from villages in the south. Airstrikes continue to pound enemy positions there as well.
Defense Secretary Ash Carter likened the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria to a parent tumor the U.S.-led coalition is bent on destroying as outgrowths pop up in other countries.
Thursday, President Obama is scheduled to meet with the National Security Council at the Pentagon to receive an update on the fight against the Islamic State, Cook said.
Credit: Tom Vanden Brook, @tvandenbrook, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo MAHMUD TURKIA, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 360
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
