"The wife of the Orlando nightclub gunman feared that Omar Mateen was planning an attack and sought to dissuade him from going forward, a federal law enforcement official said Tuesday.
In interviews with federal investigators, Noor Salman allegedly acknowledged driving Mateen to the Pulse nightclub at least once before her husband launched the assault, according to the official who was not authorized to speak publicly.
The attack, the deadliest mass shooting in U.S. history, left 49 victims dead and 53 others wounded.
Salman allegedly told investigators that she drove Mateen to Pulse, a popular gay club, about a week before Sunday's shooting, suggesting that the gunman had identified the target for some time before moving forward.
The federal official said authorities sought to substantiate the wife's account, along with other witness reports that Mateen had frequented the club often before returning with a rifle and handgun.
It is unclear whether Salman may face criminal charges as authorities seek to determine whether she possessed enough detailed knowledge to alert authorities of Mateen's plot.
Possible charges available to federal authorities include misprision of a felony, which was used in the prosecution of Michael Fortier, an associate of Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh.
Fortier pleaded guilty to the offense and other weapons charges as part of a deal in which he testified against McVeigh, offering crucial details about the bomber's planning leading up to the bombing in 1995 that killed 168 people, then the deadliest act of terrorism on U.S. soil.
After a briefing by his National Security Council, President Obama reasserted on Tuesday that the government believes Mateen was not directed by a terror organization, even though the shooter expressed allegiance to the Islamic State during a standoff with police.
Mateen professed solidarity with other extremist causes, some of which were contradictory.
Federal investigators believe Mateen had been in the Orlando area, on and off, for at least several days before the assault, the federal official said.
Credit: Kevin Johnson, USA TODAY
Word count: 351
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
