"KABUL, Afghanistan -- A misdirected American airstrike killed at least seven Afghan police officers in the hard-pressed southern province of Oruzgan, Afghan officials said on Monday.
Taliban insurgents have taken control of much of the province and have been besieging its capital, Tirin Kot, for weeks, held off mainly by the American air support for Afghan security forces.
On Sunday around noon, a police post known as Saqi, on the main highway into Tirin Kot, was under assault, and an airstrike hit the post instead of the attackers, said Abdul Qawe Omari, the deputy police chief for the province.
\"It was hit mistakenly and due to wrong directions or coordinates being given,\" Mr. Omari said. \"The fighting was ongoing at the time.\"
A spokesman for the American-led coalition, Brig. Gen. Charles H. Cleveland, confirmed only that \"we conducted an airstrike against individuals firing on, and posing a threat to, our Afghan partners in Tirin Kot on 18 September.\" His statement continued: \"We don't have any further information on who those individuals might have been or why they were attacking A.N.D.S.F. forces.\" The initials refer to Afghan security forces, including the military and the police. \"U.S., coalition and Afghan forces have the right to self-defense, and in this case were responding to an immediate threat.\"
General Cleveland referred any further questions to the Afghan authorities.
Taliban insurgents in the past two days had forced the Afghan police to abandon 38 posts securing the main highway linking Tirin Kot to Kandahar, according to Abdul Karim Khadimzai, head of the provincial council in Oruzgan. \"The main reason is low morale among police,\" he said. \"The Taliban have seized a vast area of the province.\"
Afghan officials said they had made progress recently in pushing the insurgents back from the provincial capital, where earlier this month they were inside the city attacking the police headquarters and governor's compound.
Dost Mohammad Nayab, a spokesman for the governor of Oruzgan, credited air support from the coalition with stopping the Taliban advance.
Additionally, Gen. Abdul Raziq, the powerful police chief of neighboring Kandahar Province, had arrived with reinforcements, and the central government had given him the job of leading the cleanup operation, a spokesman for General Raziq said.
Marred by internal police chaos, Tirin Kot had long remained a vulnerable spot after its police chief, Gen. Matiullah Khan, was gunned down in Kabul, the nation's capital, last year. General Khan had risen to power with generous support from NATO military contracts and political backing from the former president, Hamid Karzai. Although he kept the Taliban at bay, he was also accused of tribal favoritism and of using force against political rivals, which ultimately kept Oruzgan fragile.
The security deterioration has occurred amid a protracted struggle over the succession to become police chief. General Khan's brother, Raheemullah Khan, demanded that he be appointed to the post, but the central government persuaded him to accept the position of deputy police chief as a compromise. Nevertheless, officials in the past have accused forces under him of giving up checkpoints to signal his discontent.
As Afghan forces rallied resources to counter the Taliban threat to the capital of neighboring Helmand Province, as well as the northern city of Kunduz, which the insurgents briefly overran last year, officials and elders warned that Tirin Kot was besieged, and they complained that airstrikes were slow in coming.
Credit: FAHIM ABED and TAIMOOR SHAH; Mujib Mashal contributed reporting from Kabul, and Rod Nordland from London.
Word count: 591
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 20, 2016"
