"Pakistan's Taliban has struck again. The group Jamaat-e-Ahrar has claimed responsibility for a suicide bombing on Sunday in a park in Lahore crowded with families, including many Christians enjoying an Easter outing. The bomber set off his explosives near a swing set, killing at least 69 people and injuring more than 300 others.
A spokesman for the Taliban group said the attack had two objectives: to kill Christians and to \"give a message to government that it cannot deter us even in their stronghold, Lahore.\" Lahore, the capital of Punjab Province, is the hometown of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. Mr. Sharif's brother, Shahbaz Sharif, is the province's chief minister.
The attack was meant to expose as hollow Mr. Sharif's claims -- intended to reassure foreign investors and Pakistani citizens -- that he has the Taliban on the run. Clearly it is not on the run -- in part because a succession of Pakistani governments and the military have cynically used terrorist groups for their own purposes, encouraging them to act as proxy fighters against India.
Murdering women and children at play is all too typical of the Taliban's atrocities. Pakistan's Taliban has long targeted students, including the 2012 assassination attempt on Malala Yousafzai, an activist for girls' education; the December 2014 massacre of 150 students and teachers at an army-run school in Peshawar; and the attack on students at Bacha Khan University, also near Peshawar, in January.
Pakistan's Islamist parties are outraged by what they view as Mr. Sharif's pro-Western policies. Sunday also marked the end of mourning among Islamists for Malik Mumtaz Hussain Qadri, a police guard executed for the murder of the former governor of Punjab, Salmaan Taseer. Mr. Taseer had angered Islamists by calling for reform of Pakistan's blasphemy laws against insult to Islam.
Pakistan's Islamists consider Mr. Qadri, Mr. Taseer's killer, a hero. On Sunday, protesters angry over his execution rampaged through the streets of Islamabad, the capital. They said they would not be mollified until Pakistan institutes Shariah law and executes all people charged with blasphemy.
Mr. Sharif vowed on Monday to defeat not just Taliban terrorists but the \"extremist mind-set\" in Pakistan. But much of the blame for that mind-set lies with Pakistan's own governments and their willingness to tolerate extremism as long as it can be used as a weapon against Pakistan's enemies. Meanwhile, these same governments have invested too little in the country's real needs, including basic services, a credible judiciary and economic opportunity.
The Pakistani people have suffered too much from the ravages of the Taliban, and the hypocrisy of Pakistan's leaders. The question now is whether Mr. Sharif can succeed where his predecessors have so tragically failed.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
Credit: THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Word count: 481
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 29, 2016"
