"The morning after two million pounds of munitions exploded in New York Harbor on July 30, 1916, killing five people, jostling the Brooklyn Bridge, shattering plate-glass windows six miles away and shaking building foundations in five states, law enforcement officials all but ruled out a terrorist attack by Germans. Decades later, dogged investigations proved them wrong.
No individuals were ever convicted in the attack that summer Sunday as World War I raged in Europe, but in 1939, an international claims commission reversed itself and declared the German government legally accountable for the damage. And, finally, four decades after that, the post-World War II government in Bonn paid the last installment of a $50 million award for reparations.
The explosion on Black Tom Island, a 25-acre promontory jutting from Jersey City that was built from New Yorkers' garbage, registered an estimated 5.5 on the Richter scale -- 30 times more powerful than the collapse of the World Trade Center 85 years later. It was considered the most destructive terrorist attack in America until Sept. 11, 2001.
The blast occurred the day before Charles Evans Hughes, a former governor of New York, was to formally accept the Republican presidential nomination in a speech at Carnegie Hall and confront Woodrow Wilson, whose re-election campaign slogan, \"He kept us out of war,\" would be abrogated the following April when Congress declared war on the German Empire.
The explosion's effects also reverberated through World War II. President Franklin D. Roosevelt ordered the relocation of more than 100,000 Japanese-Americans after Pearl Harbor because, he was quoted as saying, \"We don't want any more Black Toms.\"
Yet a century later, Black Tom Island's palpable legacy is largely limited to an ambivalent plaque (\"Was it an accident or planned?\") on the site in Liberty State Park and an enduring ban, for safety reasons, on visitors climbing a ladder through the right arm of the Statue of Liberty to the rickety catwalk on the torch.
The attack and the protracted claims controversy, Jules Witcover wrote in \"Sabotage at Black Tom,\" was \"one of the least remembered true stories of American vulnerability, gullibility -- and tenacity -- of the 20th century.\"
Black Tom Island was where Lehigh Valley Railroad tracks connected to National Dock and Storage Company warehouses bulging with munitions and armaments to be barged to Gravesend Bay and loaded aboard ships bound for Europe.
While the United States was officially neutral in 1916, most of the arms were destined for Britain, France, Russia and Japan because Germany could not afford to buy them.
On July 30, two explosions, one at 2:08 a.m. and another at 2:40, destroyed more than 100 railroad cars and 13 warehouses, leaving a 375-foot-by-175-foot crater. One blast was touched off on a barge moored illegally to avoid a $25 docking fee.
Shockwaves broke thousands of windows from Downtown Brooklyn to Midtown Manhattan. At least five people were killed, including a 10-week-old baby thrown from his crib in Jersey City. Hundreds of immigrants were evacuated from Ellis Island.
\"The shells intended to make the world safe for democracy when fired through the cannon of the czar and the mikado,\" A.J. Liebling later wrote in The New York World-Telegram, \"were knocking chips out of the Goddess of Liberty on her island in the harbor.\"
Yet most law enforcement officials concurred that the blast \"cannot be charged to the account of alien plotters against the neutrality of the United States,\" The New York Times reported, \"although it is admitted that the destruction of so large a quantity of allied war material must prove cheering news to Berlin and Vienna.\"
Blame was attributed to negligence by the owners of the warehouses, railroad cars and barges, or to watchmen who had supposedly kindled smudge pots to ward off mosquitoes.
Inspector Thomas J. Tunney of the New York Police Department Bomb Squad suspected sabotage, but there was no concrete evidence, only presumed links, possibly to anarchists or to Irish and Indian nationalists opposed to British rule. Michael Kristoff, 23, a German immigrant from Bayonne, N.J., was arrested, but he was released because the police had insufficient evidence. Lothar Witzke, a German seaman, was later sentenced to hang in a separate spy case and was implicated in the conspiracy, but his sentence was commuted.
\"Black Tom shows that the United States was not neutral,\" said Kenneth T. Jackson, a Columbia University history professor, \"and Halifax demonstrates how critical American money and manufacturers were in the defeat of Germany.\"
Under a 1921 peace treaty between the United States and Germany, a commission was established to settle war claims. Lawyers for the plaintiffs finally proved that the plot had been hatched by German agents and organized from a rowhouse in Manhattan owned by a German-American opera singer.
In 1939, the commission's umpire, Supreme Court Justice Owen J. Roberts (one of three justices to reject Japanese internment), and the American referee (his German counterpart had quit, claiming bias) awarded the owners of the Black Tom property and their insurance companies $21 million in damages and $29 million in interest, the largest settlement by an international tribunal (but whittled by inflation, competing liens and a claim fund bloated with German junk bonds).
Hitler repudiated the settlement. It was renegotiated in 1952 with the Federal Republic of Germany. The first payment, $3 million, was received in 1953 and the last in 1979, but the case still echoes.
\"There is a direct line to a lot of the rhetoric we hear today -- the divisiveness on topics such as immigration, securing our borders, our place in an ever-changing world -- and that which we heard 100 years ago, just prior to the attack and in the aftermath,\" said Chad Millman, the author of \"The Detonators: The Secret Plot to Destroy America and an Epic Hunt for Justice.\"
\"Most tangibly,\" Mr. Millman said, \"was how it impacted policies years later as political leaders tried to manage fear and freedom.\"
Photograph
Damage at Black Tom Island, Left, Off Jersey City, After an Explosion Set Off by German Saboteurs On July 30, 1916. Warehouses On the Island Were Full of Munitions That Were to Be Sent to Europe. Shells Recovered by Divers Near Jersey City, Right. (Photographs Via Library of Congress)
Word count: 1061
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 25, 2016"
