"The World Trade Center, Madrid, London, Mumbai, Fort Hood, Baghdad, Benghazi, Boston, Paris, San Bernardino, Brussels, Orlando and now Nice, France.
Islam gets a bad rap, some say, after terrorist attacks. After all, \"the vast majority of Muslims are peaceful people.\" I am glad that the vast majority of Muslims are peaceful people, especially because there are 1.6 billion followers of Islam in the world.
While we do not yet know the full motives of the Tunisian-born attacker in Nice, French authorities are treating the case as yet another jihadist-inspired attack. After Thursday, how much comfort should we take in knowing that the majority (of any group) is peaceful? What does that mean for the rest of the world's second-largest religion, and how many fall into the minority group who may have different views?
As of 2011, there were 1.8 million Muslim adults (and 2.75 million Muslims of all ages) living in the USA. The Pew Research Center reiterated in December some little-discussed, but chilling, findings about these adherents.
The 8%
Pew asked U.S. Muslims under what circumstances \"suicide bombings and other forms of violence against civilians is justified to defend Islam.\" Thankfully, Muslims mostly (86%) say such behavior is \"rarely or never\" justified. Whew! That means about 1.6 million Muslim adults living here say they don't approve of violence in the name of their religion. But what about the rest?
Seven percent of Muslims in America said violence against civilians is \"sometimes\" justified in the name of Islam, and 1% said \"often.\" Whoa! This means there are more than 100,000 Muslim adults living in this country who could justify a suicide bombing in the name of their religion.
If we applied America's 8% worlwide, there'd be more than 100 million people who just might condone the next terrorist attack. And that number could be low. According to Pew, 15% or more of adults in U.S.-allied Turkey, Jordan and Egypt believe suicide bombings are sometimes or often justified. A 2006 Pew poll found that in France, 16% of Muslims believe suicide attacks are sometimes or often justified.
I am writing not to comment on or debate immigration policy, gun control policy, or various interpretations of the Quran. I am merely commenting on the tens of thousands of Muslims in America and the more than 100 million worldwide who are not bashful about justifying suicide bombings in the name of Islam. They will tell strangers who call on the phone.
What are the odds?
Who would knowingly and willingly accept these odds of a peaceful existence in their own family, neighborhood, workplace or church?
Would you feel safe accepting a job at a \"mostly peaceful\" company of 100 employees if that meant only eight of them believed a suicide bombing was sometimes or often justified in the name of their religion (or in the name of anything, for that matter)? Would you stay at a hotel whose employees were \"mostly peaceful\"? Would you trust your car to not explode randomly if the maker boasted its workers were mostly peaceful? And who would fly an airplane full of mostly peaceful passengers?
Craig Wallace, 23, was protesting Britain's planned airstrikes on Syria outside Parliament last year while holding a sign that said, \"I am Muslim. I am labeled a terrorist. I trust you. Do you trust me enough for a hug?\" He was arrested after the vote on charges of threatening to bomb Tory MP Charlotte Leslie's house. Using the name Muhammad Mujahid Islam online, Wallace wrote on Facebook: \"I'm going to smash her windows then drop a bomb on her house while she's tucked up in bed.\"
Wallace's sign would have suggested he belonged in the \"mostly peaceful\" category.
Last year, the Islamic State terrorist group released an audio message by its leader and runner-up for Time magazine's 2015 Person of the Year. \"Islam was never a religion of peace,\" said Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, 44. \"Islam is the religion of fighting. No one should believe that the war that we are waging is the war of the Islamic State. It is the war of all Muslims, but the Islamic State is spearheading it. It is the war of Muslims against infidels. Oh Muslims, go to war everywhere. It is the duty of every Muslim.\"
Now, as a Christian, I'm sure glad that hundreds of millions of Muslims worldwide would reject this religious madman's rant. It's the millions who apparently agree with him who terrify me.
Franklin Graham is president and CEO of the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association and the international Christian relief organization Samaritan's Purse.
Illustration
photo Luca Bruno, AP
Word count: 804
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
