"CORRECTION APPENDED. In the shadow of Bellevue Hospital Center, cast by a luminescent moon early Sunday, the only hint of the chaos that had erupted on the other side of Manhattan hours earlier was a trim woman in gray sweatpants and a royal-blue button-down shirt who limped out onto First Avenue.
This was Helena Ayeh. She said doctors told her that she was the last bomb victim there to be released. Just after 4 a.m., she told the story of what happened to her.
On Saturday night, she was walking through the metal gate outside her apartment building on the south side of West 23rd Street, where she has lived for 11 years. She carried a bag with some bottles of wine inside.
Without warning, an explosion lifted her off her feet. The blast, which injured 29 people, appeared to be an intentional act, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said, though the authorities did not believe it was linked to international terrorism.
\"It was the biggest blast I ever would imagine; lights flashing, glass shattering,\" Ms. Ayeh recalled. \"It happened so fast I was thrown up and landed down. I didn't know where it had come from.\"
She could not guess how high or how far she was thrown. But the concrete she landed on was littered with shards of glass, including from her shattered wine bottles. She reached a hand to her face.
\"I realized there was blood streaming down my face, and I couldn't see out of my eye,\" Ms. Ayeh said. \"I said, 'Help! Help!' when I saw the blood.\"
Around her, the smoke-choked air was filled with the shrieks of bystanders and the sirens of emergency vehicles. Someone shouted to her that an ambulance was near the end of the block. With blood pouring from the wound to her right eye, she struggled on injured legs toward it until emergency medical workers met her.
\"The ambulance, they literally picked me up off the ground,\" Ms. Ayeh said.
At Bellevue, she received multiple stitches to a cut at the edge of her right eye. Beneath her black-rimmed glasses, it was red and swollen. Her injured legs were also treated.
\"They patched me up,\" she said, a weary smile on her face.
Ms. Ayeh later said in a follow-up interview: \"I consider myself very, very lucky I'm not blind. I'm very blessed, I think.\"
Just before a taxi stopped and took her away on Sunday morning, she reflected on the Dumpster under which officials said the bomb had been placed. She knew it well.
\"It's been there forever,\" she said. \"I really didn't think about it.\"
Correction: September 23, 2016, Friday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: A picture caption on Monday with an article about a woman who was wounded in the bombing on West 23rd Street in Manhattan misidentified the workers pushing a gurney at the scene. They are emergency medical responders with the Fire Department, not firefighters.
Photograph
Firefighters at the Scene of the Explosion in Chelsea On Saturday. \"It Happened so Fast,\" Said Helena Ayeh, Who Was Injured. (Photograph by Andres Kudacki/Associated Press)
Word count: 545
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 19, 2016"
