"JERUSALEM -- The Palestinian manager of the Gaza branch of World Vision, accused by Israel of funneling millions of agency dollars to benefit Hamas, was arraigned on Tuesday at a hearing that was closed to the public.
The decision to close the hearing came despite calls for an open trial from Kevin Jenkins, the president of World Vision, a major Christian aid organization.
\"A trial is legitimate if it is transparent,\" Mr. Jenkins told Agence France-Presse in an interview on Monday. \"Obviously, with such serious allegations against a staff member, we are calling for him to have a fair hearing.\"
Lea Tsemel, the lawyer for the branch manager, Mohammad El Halabi, said that while closed hearings were not uncommon in cases like this, the proceedings against Mr. Halabi were taking place amid unusual secrecy.
Ms. Tsemel said Israeli judicial officials typically concealed some evidence in trials involving security. But in Mr. Halabi's case, all procedures and all evidence will be shielded from the public, Ms. Tsemel said.
She added that there was evidence that even she would not be allowed to see. That, she said, is \"very uncommon.\"
Emmanuel Nachshon, a spokesman for the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said Mr. Halabi's arraignment was closed because sensitive security information was being relayed. Israeli courts typically hold closed hearings when Palestinians who are secretly collaborating with Israel are the source of some evidence.
Mr. Halabi was arrested on June 15 at the Erez crossing point between Israel and Gaza, the territory controlled by Hamas, which is considered a terrorist organization by Israel, the United States and the European Union. He was held for nearly 50 days before charges were filed.
Ms. Tsemel said Mr. Halabi told her that he had been physically and psychologically abused in detention. But Ms. Tsemel said she was prohibited from providing details of the abuse.
Mr. Halabi did not enter a plea at the arraignment, Ms. Tsemel said. But she said he denied all wrongdoing, calling the charges \"nonsense.\"
World Vision has said the accusations against Mr. Halabi are difficult to reconcile with its financial records.
In a statement issued on Aug. 8, World Vision said its cumulative operating budget for Gaza over the past decade was $22.5 million, far lower than the $43 million Mr. Halabi has been accused of diverting.
The statement also noted that Mr. Halabi had been the manager of World Vision's Gaza operations only since October 2014. Before then, he had the authority to approve only $15,000 in the Gaza budget at a time.
A senior official with Shin Bet, Israel's internal security service, has said some of the money was used by Hamas militants to dig cross-border tunnels to carry out attacks in Israeli territory. Donated money was also used to build a Hamas military base, and 2,500 food packages meant for needy families in Gaza were transferred to Hamas battalions, the official added.
World Vision is one of the largest nongovernmental groups working in Gaza, where it says its aid has benefited nearly 40,000 children.
The next hearing will be held in early October.
Word count: 526
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 31, 2016"
