"The bloodiest mass shooting in modern U.S. history has exposed a dangerous loophole that allows known or suspected terrorists to legally purchase guns. The amendment we have proposed to close this loophole is consistent with the Constitution and Second Amendment and will help save lives.
The need is real. CIA Director John Brennan said this week, \"We judge that ISIL is training and attempting to deploy operatives for further attacks. ISIL has a large cadre of Western fighters who could potentially serve as operatives for attacks in the West.\"
Over the past decade, FBI records show that nine of every 10 Americans on the consolidated terrorist watchlist who try to buy a firearm are legally allowed to do so. Our amendment would change that, allowing the attorney general to block the sale of guns to these individuals.
This is not a broad amendment. Only one-half of 1% of individuals in the FBI's terrorist screening database are Americans -- fewer than 5,000. And the attorney general is required to examine the \"totality of the circumstances\" before denying a sale.
The amendment includes very strong due process protections. It allows an administrative appeal at the Justice Department and the full appeals process in federal courts, the same process that already exists for other individuals denied a firearms purchase.
In fact, when the Justice Department under President Bush proposed similar legislation in 2007, it said the bill provided appropriate safeguards.
The Supreme Court has clearly said the right to bear arms is not unlimited. Nor is a criminal conviction required to deny an individual a gun.
The 10 categories of individuals already prohibited from buying guns include those who haven't been convicted, such as fugitives, drug addicts and individuals committed to mental institutions. Certainly, known or suspected terrorists should be on that list.
Support for this bill is broad. The Justice Department and the White House support it, and a Republican introduced the underlying measure in the House. It's time to enact this commonsense provision.
Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., is vice chair of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Word count: 364
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
