"RIO DE JANEIRO -- Brazil's Olympics begin on Friday, and local leaders and Brazilian society are ill-prepared for the threat of a terrorist attack like those in Munich in 1972 and Atlanta in 1996. They lack experience with the issue and don't have sufficient human and financial resources. In addition, the structure of public security in the country is weak. International cooperation is helping, but Brazil must face the challenge and improve its institutions for the future.
Since July 21, the Federal Police have arrested 12 suspects on charges of attempting to establish connections with the Islamic State. The arrests were carried out under a new antiterror law passed just this year. The suspects, who called themselves \"Defenders of the Shariah,\" have been ridiculed on social media for lacking military weapons or training, for not even knowing one another, and for using mobile messaging services like WhatsApp and Telegram. But men with similar profiles committed massacres in Nice and Munich.
There is a historical reason that makes it hard even to discuss the issue of terrorism in Brazil. The 1964-85 dictatorship used the word \"terrorists\" to classify peaceful groups who opposed it. Since then, under the democratic regime, the political leadership has avoided using the word altogether. Fundamentalist groups, such as Al Qaeda or the Islamic State, are far from the reality of Brazilians, who for more than a century have lived with a large Arab community -- seven million to 10 million, including the interim president, Michel Temer, a son of Lebanese immigrants -- that is prosperous and well integrated.
Brazilians are dealing with not only the authorities' inexperience with terrorism, but also a lack of safety resources. Rio de Janeiro is going through a financial collapse; firefighters, doctors, police officers and teachers often have to endure 10- to 30-day delays in receiving their salaries. Sometimes, there is no money for basic supplies like gasoline for police cars. The government hired a private company to screen the public for weapons at the sport facilities, but it was small and had no experience in large events and no trained personnel. Last week, Justice Minister Alexandre de Moraes canceled the contract, and transferred the responsibility to the Brazilian Force, a military force similar to the United States National Guard.
The current political crisis, including the continuing impeachment proceedings against President Dilma Rousseff, and the worst economic recession in 25 years have made a majority of the population hostile or indifferent to the Olympics -- only 40 percent of Brazilians believe such an event would be good for the country. Many Brazilians are also confused because justice and defense ministers offer a very different analysis on the nature and dimension of a potential terrorist attack. Are any threats strong or weak? How many suspects have been detected? What should be done to confront them? It depends whom you ask.
The general perception is that the counterterrorism law -- passed, ironically, during the administration of Ms. Rousseff, who was a political prisoner during the dictatorship for having been involved in a guerrilla group labeled terrorist -- came about as a result of international pressure, and mainly because Brazil had been chosen to host the Olympics. The new legislation is controversial because it embodies a vague definition of terrorism that has been criticized by human-rights organizations and the United Nations, which are afraid the word can be used against grass-roots movements that have organized protests against Brazilian governments since 2013.
The government is focused on the risk of lone wolves, inspired by fundamentalist groups, who might target foreign delegations. Despite strong international cooperation, the Brazilian police and intelligence services lack agents and specialists with expertise on how the Islamic State operates.
There is also a concern over the rising homicide rate in Rio de Janeiro. The government reported 2,100 murders from January to May of this year, a 13 percent increase over the same period in 2015. The city is overwhelmed by crime, uncontrolled circulation of automatic weapons and unprepared police officers. The National Force, which is in charge of protecting sports facilities during the Olympics, is being coerced by paramilitary groups in poor areas, restricting the movements of the officers and establishing rules for their behavior -- for example, forbidding them to go to bars in these communities. For most Brazilians, everyday crime is a much more imminent threat than terrorism. But this does not make the threat of terrorism less dangerous or real.
Brazil's experience with the World Cup in 2014, and now the Olympic Games, can be a foundation for investing in and developing the country's capabilities against terrorism -- specialists, investigative work, reliable information networks and awareness campaigns to educate the population about the seriousness of the issue. And we need to achieve all this without the human rights violations that have marked our past and tainted many other international efforts against terrorism.
Succeeding against the threat of terror is for Brazil one of the major tests during this Olympics. The hope is that this can be accomplished without victims, something increasingly rare in our world.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
AuthorAffiliation
MAURICIO SANTORO Maurício Santoro is a political scientist and a professor of International Studies at Rio de Janeiro State University.
Word count: 907
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 5, 2016"
