"Simon Jenkins, The Guardian: The purpose of terrorism is not to destroy or kill. It is to pursue a political cause through the massive publicity that is attached to terrifying incidents. The explosive force derives from our reaction to it. The blanket media coverage assured for any act of violence is reckless. The media must 'report,' but it need not go berserk in reveling in the violence caused, as it manifestly has done to Islamic State brutality. More serious, the intention of the terrorist is clearly to shut down Western society, to show liberal democracy to be a sham and to invoke the persecution of Muslims. Yet that is the invariable response of the security industry to these incidents. Convinced of its potency, it dare not admit there are some things against which it cannot protect us.\"
The Dallas Morning News, editorial: \"The initial bulletins from Belgium, horrific as they were, were at the same time not unexpected. Carnage on such a scale still shocks the senses, but such terrorism is nothing new to Europe. If Paris destroyed our hopes that ISIL could be contained to its home base in Syria and Iraq, Brussels should convince us that determined, networked terrorists remain a step ahead of those chasing them. This is a serious problem for Europe, but it's not solely Europe's problem. Make no mistake that a deadly attack on U.S. soil is the ultimate prize for ISIL leaders. Consider Chattanooga, San Bernardino and Garland fair warning.\"
David A. Graham, The Atlantic: \"Belgian jihadism seems to mimic French Islamist militancy, only more concentrated -- as befits the smaller country. Both have large numbers of immigrants who are poorer and isolated from the dominant culture. Both countries have also seen far-right, anti-immigrant parties rise by loudly declaring a Muslim menace. Experts also say it is comparatively easy to acquire illegal guns in Belgium, making it an attractive base for operations.\"
ChicagoTribune, editorial: \"This time, Brussels bleeds. The groups that feast on the slaughter of innocent civilians have a deep bench of suicidal soldiers, twisted admirers and skilled enablers. Eradicating them will take years. No one is safe until everyone is.\"
Word count: 373
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
