"Several teams in this year's Virginia High School League debate championship are threatening to boycott the event, currently scheduled to take place at Liberty University, if it is not moved to another location because of statements made by the university president on gun control and Muslims.
In a Dec. 4 convocation speech, Liberty University President Jerry Falwell Jr. encouraged students to obtain concealed carry permits in the wake of the San Bernardino shooting, saying, \"If more good people had concealed carry permits, then we could end those Muslims before they go out there and kill.\"
Falwell later clarified to The Washington Post that when he said \"Muslims\" he was specifically referring to Islamic terrorists.
However, his statement, as well as the cheers it drew from the crowd of Liberty students, has sparked concerns from debate team members, coaches and debate alumni.
The debate coach of Broad Run High School in Ashburn, Va., Jim Dunning, said he found Falwell's statements disturbing and contrary to the principals of debate. His students have elected to boycott the tournament on April 22-23 if the venue is not changed.
\"Going for weapons as a primary means of solving problems is not what debate is all about,\" Dunning told USA TODAY College. \"We tend to focus on words rather than bullets.\"
The team from Lake Braddock Secondary School in Burke, Va., will also be boycotting the event if the venue is not changed.
Liberty University has a consistently well-ranked debate program and a long-running relationship with the VHSL, a body of 315 member schools that oversees interscholastic competition.
VHSL executive committee chair James Stemple says that if Liberty University cannot guarantee students a safe environment, the VHSL will re-evaluate its relationship with the school.
Liberty University has not responded to requests for comment.
Credit: Aine Cain, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Andrew Harrer, Bloomberg
Word count: 336
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
