"LONDON -- When England's cricket team plays a one-day international match in Bangladesh on Oct. 7, it will do so without its captain, Eoin Morgan, who recently opted out of the tour, citing security concerns. Alex Hales, another leading English player, made the same decision, and the team's largest fan group has said that it, too, will follow an official government security warning and skip the tour.
The withdrawals of the players, and the nervousness among fans, reflected serious and increasingly common safety concerns in top-flight international cricket. Pakistan, the world's top-ranked Test team, has not played a match on home soil in more than seven years, and Afghanistan, a rising power in one-day internationals, has never hosted an official international match. In Bangladesh, where the national teams are ranked seventh in one-day internationals and ninth in Tests, concerns about terrorism predate the coming England trip: In the past year, Australian cricket officials have called off two tours.
The International Cricket Council, which governs the game worldwide, said it was \"sad\" that, increasingly, security concerns were making top players and teams unwilling to travel and preventing a handful of countries from being able to host them. The I.C.C., it said through a spokesman, \"would like to see international cricket being played safely in as many countries as possible.\"
Still, England's security concerns are not unfounded. In July, an attack by five gunmen on a cafe in Dhaka, Bangladesh, resulted in the deaths of 20 hostages, most of them foreigners. In the wake of the attack, Foreign and Commonwealth Office advice to Britons planning to visit Bangladesh suggested that \"a heightened threat of further terrorist attacks and foreigners, in particular Westerners, may be directly targeted.\"
Morgan, who had played an Indian Premier League match after a bomb exploded outside the stadium in 2010 and also played in Bangladesh during political unrest in 2013, said he had opted out because he had \"told myself I would not put myself in that situation again.\"
Bangladesh is relieved England is coming at all. In 2015, Australia postponed a tour to the country indefinitely, citing security concerns, and this year it withdrew its under-19 team from the World Cup there for similar reasons. At the time, the Australian government warned of \"reliable information to suggest that militants may be planning to target Australian interests in Bangladesh.\"
England's decision to go ahead with its tour -- which will include three one-day internationals and two Test matches, which use the sport's longest format -- was made after consultation with the England Cricket Board's security chief, Reg Dickason. In August, Dickason toured the stadiums, and the cities, where England is set to play. The I.C.C. has no power to mandate that teams like England or Australia play in Bangladesh, or any nation; all matters relating to safety and security in a bilateral series rest with the participating members.
The I.C.C. is responsible only for the safety and security of its officials, and after conducting its own security checks in Bangladesh, the I.C.C. ruled recently that the series with England would be safe enough to send its officials to oversee the matches.
Such security concerns have become all too familiar to the I.C.C. Pakistan has not played at home in a Test since March 2009, when Sri Lanka's team bus was attacked by Islamic militants en route to the third day of a Test in Lahore; gunshots killed a driver and six Pakistani police officers and injured several players. Ever since, Pakistan has been forced to play its home matches in the United Arab Emirates, making the country's rise to No. 1 in the world Test rankings all the more notable.
\"Cricket-loving people of Pakistan, they are deprived; they can't watch their own heroes playing,\" said Intikhab Alam, the manager of the national team. \"It's very difficult for the players and their families.\"
Playing away from home has also come at a huge financial cost. Because of the reduced value of sponsorships and, less significant, the costs of relocating players and the reduced revenue from ticket sales, the Pakistan Cricket Board is estimated to have missed out on $100 million since 2009. A significant portion of that figure can be attributed to the cancellation of matches against India, which has not played Pakistan in any Test match since a terrorist attack in Mumbai in November 2008 conducted by a militant organization based in Pakistan.
Afghanistan, a rising cricket power that currently ranks 10th globally in one-day internationals, also cannot play at home for security reasons. Instead, Afghanistan has been a nomadic team since the nation's first official international match, in 2004. Its home matches were normally played in the U.A.E., like Pakistan's, but last December, the Afghanistan Cricket Board signed an agreement to make a facility in Greater Noida, India, 25 miles from Delhi, the team's new home ground.
The initiative was a recognition that Afghanistan is unlikely to be able to host international teams for many years.
\"Our vision is to maintain cricket as the No. 1 sport in the country,\" said Shafiq Stanikzai, the chief executive of the Afghanistan Cricket Board. \"Not playing at home can be a major setback to achieving our vision.\"
Stanikzai added that not being able to exploit home conditions, which are significant in cricket, could be detrimental to the performance of the national team and that being unable to play at home prevented the board from becoming self-sufficient financially. Still, 11 international players, from Pakistan and Zimbabwe, played in Kabul in the Shpageeza Cricket League this year, and Stanikzai said the board hoped to host international tournaments for junior players soon, as a step toward holding full international matches.
\"The I.C.C. sincerely hopes that normalcy will soon return to Afghanistan and Pakistan,\" the organization said through a spokesman. \"But until such time the independent security experts give a go-ahead for international cricket to resume in these two countries, the cricket fraternity remains committed to support and assist them by playing on neutral venues.\"
Photograph
Pakistan, the World's Top-Ranked Test Team, has Not Played a Test Match at Home Since 2009, When a Sri Lankan Team Bus Was Attacked in a Deadly Ambush. (Photograph by Aamir Aureshi/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images) (B8); Pakistan, Which Met the West Indies On Saturday in Dubai, has Been Forced to Play Its Home Matches in the United Arab Emirates. (Photograph by Francois Nel/Getty Images); Bangladeshi Fans Watched a Twenty20 Match Between Bangladesh and India On a Screen in a Dhaka Street in March. (Photograph by Munir Uz Zaman/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images) (B11)
Word count: 1116
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 28, 2016"
