"WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department charged two Virginia men on Saturday with terrorism-related offenses, one day after F.B.I. agents arrested one of them at an airport where officials believe he was planning to begin a journey to Syria to fight with the Islamic State.
Both men, Joseph Hassan Farrokh and Mahmoud Amin Mohamed Elhassan, are in F.B.I. custody and face up to 20 years in prison if they are convicted, the Justice Department said Saturday in a news release.
The department did not cite any evidence that the two men had direct contact with operatives for the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and seemed to base the terrorism charges in large part on conversations they had with three F.B.I. informants.
The arrests came as counterterrorism officials reported that the number of Americans trying to get to Syria and Iraq to fight with the Islamic State has fallen off. In 2014, about nine Americans a month tried to leave to join the group. For several months in the second half of last year, that number dwindled to a few a month.
In October, the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, said he was not certain of the reasons for the decline, but cited as possibilities the brutal living conditions in Syria as well as what seemed to be a new effort by the Islamic State to inspire Americans to carry out attacks at home.
The prospect that the Islamic State might incite its American followers to attack in the United States has led the F.B.I. to drastically escalate surveillance -- including electronic eavesdropping -- of people suspected of having ties to, or sympathies for, the Islamic State.
Mr. Farrokh, a 28-year-old native of Pennsylvania, was arrested at the airport in Richmond, Va., where he was planning to fly to Chicago and on to Amman, Jordan, according to a criminal complaint released on Saturday. During wiretapped conversations with an F.B.I. informant, Mr. Farrokh discussed beginning his journey from a smaller airport to evade scrutiny.
The complaint said that Mr. Elhassan, a 25-year-old permanent resident of the United States originally from Sudan, drove Mr. Farrokh to within a mile of the airport, and that Mr. Farrokh took a taxi the rest of the way. Mr. Elhassan is being charged with aiding and abetting Mr. Farrokh's attempts to provide material support to a terrorist organization.
The F.B.I. recorded conversations between Mr. Elhassan and an informant, during which Mr. Elhassan said he knew of Mr. Farrokh's plans to join the Islamic State in Syria and said Mr. Farrokh had misled his family by telling them he planned to travel to Saudi Arabia to study.
The complaint said that Mr. Farrokh did not appear to want to return to the United States.
During a meeting this month in the car of an F.B.I. informant in Falls Church, Va., Mr. Farrokh said the fact that there are American Special Operations forces fighting the Islamic State in Syria was for \"the best,\" since he wanted to die a martyr, according to information released by the government on Saturday.
Follow the New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.
Word count: 545
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 17, 2016"
