"Nearly four years ago, the novelist Wendy Mills was at the airport with her family when her son Zack asked a simple but wrenching question.
He wanted to know why all the passengers going through security were taking off their shoes. Ms. Mills gave Zack, then 9, a vague reply like, \"It's to keep us safe.\" Unsatisfied, he persisted, and eventually, the conversation wove around to the Sept. 11 attacks, which happened before he was born.
Ms. Mills, who lives in Pine Island, Fla., and writes young- adult fiction, realized during that conversation that most of her teenage readers had no direct memory of the attacks. Soon after, she started working on \"All We Have Left,\" a novel about two teenagers -- a Muslim girl named Alia, and a troubled boy called Travis -- who are trapped in an elevator in the World Trade Center on the morning of Sept. 11. The novel jumps back and forth between 2001 and 2016, when Travis's younger sister, Jesse, tries to find out what happened to her brother, who died in the tower, and fights with her grief-stricken father, who has become virulently anti-Muslim.
\"I wanted to write a story that made our shared history accessible to them,\" Ms. Mills said. \"Here's a whole generation of kids who weren't alive and don't know what it was like that day, and they're not going to know the world before 9/11. It wasn't a perfect world, but it felt like a safer world.\"
\"All We Have Left,\" which was published last month, is one of around a half-dozen 9/11-themed novels for young readers coming out this year. The cluster of books on the subject, arriving in time for the 15th anniversary of the events, represents the first major wave of children's literature that explicitly deals with the terrorist attacks and is aimed at readers with no memory of the events. The stories range from tame middle-grade novels for 8- to 12-year-olds, which center on the tragedy but keep the horror mostly at a distance, to young-adult novels with unflinching descriptions of the mayhem and bloodshed that unfolded as the towers burned and fell.
While Sept. 11 has become a familiar plotline in film, television and adult fiction, children's book authors have been reluctant to take it on. Many worried that the material was too traumatic for young readers, and feared that parents and teachers would be skittish about engaging with the subject. Others thought using the attacks as a plot device might seem insensitive and exploitative.
\"Ten years even felt too soon,\" said Alvina Ling, the vice president and editor in chief of Little, Brown Children's. \"It's so painful for a lot of us.\"
Before this year, the handful of children's book authors who tackled the issue did so with trepidation.
\"Writing a bad book is O.K., but writing a bad 9/11 book, that was terrifying,\" said David Levithan, whose young-adult novel about the attacks, \"Love Is the Higher Law,\" came out in 2009.
Now, another fear has taken hold. For many children who weren't alive on Sept. 11 or were too young to remember the attacks, the events feel distant and unreal, like a Hollywood disaster movie or a historical tragedy like the John F. Kennedy assassination. Some know only the broadest outline of the event, while others have been shielded from it altogether. And as the years pass, writers worry that their own memories of the day are slipping away.
\"Writers are feeling safer about writing about the subject, and also realizing, wait a minute, kids don't know,\" said Caitlyn Dlouhy, whose imprint at Atheneum Books published \"Somewhere Among,\" a middle-grade novel that addresses the attacks. \"This is our history, and if we're not writing about it when it's fresh, we're not going to capture it.\"
In Jewell Parker Rhodes's middle-grade novel \"Towers Falling,\" a homeless girl living in Brooklyn in 2016 knows nothing about the attacks until she learns about Sept. 11 in school. She gradually realizes that her father was at the World Trade Center that day and is suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, leaving him unable to work and support their family.
Ms. Rhodes said she and her editor wrestled with how much detail to include about the attacks. She felt it was crucial to keep some of the images that are seared into our collective memory, including those of desperate people leaping from the towers.
\"The hardest part was not to patronize them, not to pretend that they live in an innocent world, because they know more than we think they know,\" she said of young readers.
Other authors said they struggled with how to convey the scope of the tragedy in a way that wasn't too traumatic.
In her new middle-grade novel, \"Nine, Ten,\" Nora Raleigh Baskin focused on the solidarity and compassion that Americans displayed on Sept. 11. The narrative follows four young characters in different parts of the country in the days leading up to the attacks. One character's mother has a meeting at the World Trade Center that morning. Another, a Muslim girl in Ohio who wears a hijab, is terrified that her family will be targeted and blamed for the attacks.
Ms. Baskin wrote an early draft in which a firefighter who befriends a boy in Brooklyn dies in the towers. But she worried it was too heartbreaking for 9-year-olds, so she changed the ending.
\"Here I am, writing a book about 9/11, and I didn't want anybody to die,\" she said.
It's unclear whether there's a big appetite for these books among young readers, and some publishers remain wary.
Gae Polisner struggled to find a publisher for her new young-adult novel, \"The Memory of Things,\" which opens right after the towers fell and follows a teenager named Kyle as he flees downtown Manhattan and rescues a girl who is cowering at the side of the Brooklyn Bridge.
When Ms. Polisner and her agent sent the novel around to publishing houses two years ago, more than 10 editors rejected it. Some said the subject matter felt too raw and painful, and that they couldn't see a market for it. \"I said to my agent, I appreciate that, but they're not the audience for the book, and the teens that are going to be reading this book are not going to have that visceral reaction,\" Ms. Polisner said.
Finally, an editor at St. Martin's Griffin bought it. The novel, which was published on Tuesday, has drawn glowing early reviews and has been embraced by some teachers and school librarians.
Justin Gensch, a 14-year-old at David Brearley High School in Kenilworth, N.J., said that reading \"The Memory of Things\" gave him a sense of what it was like on the morning the towers fell.
\"Even though you see videos and hear in history class about what happened, I felt like I never understood how people felt,\" he said. \"It helped me understand what the fear was like because I never really got it, but now I do.\"
Ms. Mills, the author of \"All We Have Left,\" said that her son Zack, now almost 13, read her novel over the summer. When he finished, she said, he asked her, \"Did all that stuff actually happen?\"
Photograph
Publishers Have Taken a Chance On Several New Children's Novels, Above, As the 15th Anniversary of the 9/11 Attacks Draws Near. It's Unclear Whether There's a Big Appetite for These Books Among Young Readers, and Some Publishers Remain Wary. (C1); Clockwise From Top Left: Jewell Parker Rhodes, Nora Raleigh Baskin, Gae Polisner and Wendy Mills Have Written 9/11 Books Aimed at Readers Too Young to Remember the 2001 Attacks. (Photographs by ÁNgel Franco/the New York Times; Lisa Bevis; Rick Kopstein; Ryan Stone for the New York Times) (C4)
Word count: 1317
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 10, 2016"
