"BEIRUT, Lebanon -- Hezbollah attacked Israeli military vehicles on Monday in a disputed border territory, an assault the militant group said was in response to Israel's killing last month of Samir Kuntar, a key Hezbollah operative in Syria.
Israeli forces responded by firing artillery into southern Lebanon. The exchange added to rising tensions in the region amid an escalating diplomatic confrontation between Saudi Arabia and Iran. But by nightfall, the situation on the border appeared to be calm.
The exchange fits a pattern that Israel and Hezbollah have followed since their devastating war in 2006, in which they attempt to respond to attacks with enough force to satisfy constituents and save face, but not strongly enough to provoke an escalation from the other side.
Monday's attack took place in Shebaa Farms, an area now held by Israel that has also been claimed by Lebanon and Syria. Israel's military said that a bulldozer and other vehicles hit a roadside bomb, causing no casualties. Hezbollah's Al Manar television station said the attack also used missiles, and that it had destroyed a military vehicle, injuring soldiers inside. On the Lebanese side, local media reported that several houses were damaged. The Israeli Army said it had targeted only Hezbollah sites.
Israel is widely believed to have been behind an explosion in a suburb of Damascus last month that killed Mr. Kuntar, a Lebanese Druse. He had served nearly three decades in prison for his role in the 1979 killings of a police officer, a civilian and that man's daughter in an Israeli coastal town near the Lebanese border. The civilian's wife accidentally smothered their other daughter while trying to quiet her.
Hezbollah adopted Mr. Kuntar's cause during his prison term, and after his release in a prisoner exchange, he played an increasingly visible role in the group, most recently attempting to recruit Syrian Druse fighters to help the group in its support of the Syrian government against a five-year insurgency.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Word count: 354
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 5, 2016"
