"The Senate on Monday rejected four partisan gun measures offered in the wake of the Orlando massacre, including proposals to keep guns out of the hands of people on terror watch lists.
Two Republican proposals would have increased funding for the national background check system and created a judicial review process to keep a person on a terror watch list from buying a gun; two Democratic measures would have expanded background checks to private gun sales and allowed the Justice Department to ban gun sales to suspected terrorists.
The Senate voted down similar bills in December after the shooting rampage in San Bernardino, Calif. Under the current party split in the Senate, any successful bid to toughen gun laws would need bipartisan support to get to the 60-vote threshold required. There are 54 Republicans and 46 Democrats and independents who caucus with them.
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., suggested Democrats are simply using the issue as a political talking point and said the two GOP measures sponsored by Sens. John Cornyn, R-Texas, and Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, are \"real solutions.\"
\"No one wants a terrorist to be able to buy guns or explosives. No one,\" McConnell said. \"Instead of using this as an opportunity to push a partisan agenda or craft the next 30-second campaign ad, colleagues like Sen. Cornyn and Sen. Grassley are pursuing real solutions that can help keep Americans safer from the threat of terrorism.\"
Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., called the GOP measures \"political stunts.\"
\"These are amendments to divert attention from real legislation,\" Reid said. \"Why? So Republicans (can) say, 'Hey, look, we tried,' and all the time, their cheerleaders, their bosses at the NRA, are cheering.\"
The NRA released a statement Monday night deriding the measures: \"Today, the American people witnessed an embarrassing display in the United States Senate. President Obama and his allies proved they are more interested in playing politics than addressing their failure to keep Americans safe from the threat of radical Islamic terrorism.\"
Democrats say the GOP is out of step with the American people on gun laws. An NBC News/Survey Monkey online poll conducted after Orlando found 61% of those surveyed support stricter gun laws; 38% opposed them.
Credit: Donovan Slack, @donovanslack, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Win McNamee, Getty Images
Word count: 408
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
