"When the military needed more recruits to man bombers during World War II, it turned to Hollywood.
The movies had already glamorized pilots, and recruiting offices were flooded with young men eager to earn their wings. But the military also needed navigators, ground crews and gunners -- less sexy but no less critical jobs.
Gen. Hap Arnold, chief of the Army Air Forces, met with Jack Warner, the legendary studio head of that era, and described the problem. \"We need some way to put glamour in these other jobs,\" Arnold said.
Warner responded with The Rear Gunner, a 1943 film that showcased the heroics of a B-24 gunner who saved the day when he blasted a Japanese Zero.
The anecdote, included in Projections of War, a book by Thomas Doherty about the World War II film industry, was not unusual. Hollywood, along with corporate America and most of the country, openly helped the government sell the war to the American public.
Why is it so hard to imagine Hollywood or Silicon Valley doing the same today?
No one was surprised when Apple rejected a request from the FBI concerning a terror investigation. Authorities want Apple's help in unlocking a phone that belonged to one of the terrorists who killed 14 people in San Bernardino, Calif., in December. Apple chief Timothy Cook has said developing software to unlock the phone is a dangerous precedent that would undercut security on its devices.
There are good arguments on both sides, but the fight does raise questions about Silicon Valley's culture.
Apple isn't the only U.S. company to rebuff requests to help with the government's fight against radical Islam.
Twitter kicked off thousands of accounts associated with the Islamic State -- but only after long resisting such requests.
Americans don't feel as threatened as they did during World War II. A tiny fraction of those in the armed forces battle radical Islam in Iraq, Afghanistan and other parts of the world. The rest of us go about our business as if little changed since the Sept. 11 attacks.
Our view of government also has changed, said Doherty, a professor at Brandeis University. \"In the wake of Vietnam and Watergate, the government is no longer your friend,\" he says. Even on issues of national security, the public is rightly skeptical of government requests.
Silicon Valley is its own culture, peopled by highly educated workers with a deep mistrust of government. Its leaders have succeeded in global economy, attended elite schools and grown up in sheltered communities.
\"Apple and the rest of Silicon Valley are acting as if they aren't part of the United States -- as if they are part of some 'global' economy and thus above the laws of the country that gave birth to them and has nurtured their prosperity,\" Max Boot wrote in Commentary.
In World War II, the country could count on filmmakers, actors, advertising executives and corporate chiefs in the effort to defeat the Axis powers.
Today, when tech titans or Hollywood executives promote causes, they often are international and focused on education and health. In their view, helping the U.S. government smacks of choosing sides.
Silicon Valley sees the war against the Islamic State as the government's fight, not the nation's. Patriotism makes them uncomfortable. \"Part of it is they are just nave,\" Doherty said. \"They just assume the freedoms they enjoy are there forever.\"
Michaels covers military issues for USA TODAY.
Credit: Jim Michaels, @jimmichaels, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Thomas D. McAvoy, The LIFE Picture Collection
Word count: 625
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
