"BEIRUT, Lebanon -- Syrian government troops and allied militias, backed by intensive Russian airstrikes, pushed on Thursday into parts of Palmyra, the desert city they are seeking to retake from the Islamic State militant group along with its majestic ancient ruins, Syrian state news media and residents said.
The battle, raging for weeks, carries deep symbolic significance, after Islamic State militants blew up some of Palmyra's most important ancient structures, causing irrevocable damage to the Unesco World Heritage site.
Palmyra also occupies a strategic crossroads between the Islamic State's territory in the east and the more populated coastal areas. Since the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL or Daesh, took over in May, residents have endured harsh rule and summary killings. They have also faced heavy bombing and the shelling of civilian areas by government and allied forces.
Syrian officials have said they could retake the city within hours or days. State television said government troops had entered the city, and a monitoring group, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, said they had reached the entrance to the ancient site, an area with several hotels, and were working to remove booby-trapped bombs before advancing further.
Yet the situation remained fluid amid conflicting reports about exactly how far the Syrian forces had advanced.
State television has broadcast images showing that pro-government forces had reached the approach to the city near the ancient site. Residents reported on Thursday that Islamic State fighters were urging civilians, over loudspeakers, to leave the city, and that they had planted explosive devices in the palm groves and in archaeological areas on the outskirts.
The battle for Palmyra has been the main thrust of Russia's military activities in Syria since President Vladimir V. Putin announced last week that he was scaling back airstrikes as a new round of peace talks began in Geneva.
And on Thursday evening, Russia's Interfax news agency reported that a Russian special forces officer had been killed near Palmyra while directing airstrikes.
Taking back Palmyra would be a political and military victory for the Syrian government and for Russia, its most powerful ally. The city is one of Syria's most recognizable sites, and the destruction of monuments there, including the Temple of Bel, has spurred global outrage.
President Bashar al-Assad of Syria has long contended that he is defending world civilization against extremists like the Islamic State, and a victory in Palmyra would promote that idea.
At the same time, his opponents, as well as some government supporters, note bitterly that Palmyra, also known as Tadmur, fell to the Islamic State after Mr. Assad's forces fled in disarray.
According to the accounts of numerous residents and of pro-government fighters, soldiers and the police received few reinforcements as the Islamic State advanced on the city.
Some fled through the desert. Others hid until they were found and killed, including one police officer who was part of a contingent sent there with few weapons when it was clear that it was falling to the Islamic State.
Taking back Palmyra is tricky, because heavy exchanges of gun or mortar fire could end up further damaging the ancient ruins. Residents have reported major damage to civilian neighborhoods from the government and allied bombardments, accompanied by videos showing rubble and collapsed walls in the city center.
Khaled al-Homsi, an antigovernment activist from Palmyra who takes a special interest in its archaeological heritage -- he is related to an archaeology expert and former official killed by the Islamic State -- has complained for months that government and Russian attacks on the militants have come dangerously close to the ancient structures.
Mr. Homsi, who uses a nom de guerre for safety reasons, said he had been forced to flee the city and had no hope of going home anytime soon, regardless of whether the Islamic State or the government is in charge.
\"Unfortunately, both are my enemies,\" he said.
\"We should be patient,\" said a cafe owner who fled to Turkey. \"I'll go back if security is restored, in spite of the destruction, which I'm hearing is huge.\"
Like other residents interviewed, the cafe owner asked that his name not be used to avoid reprisals from all sides.
Residents of Palmyra have frequently found themselves caught uncomfortably in the middle. Many have fled, with some heading to Raqqa, Syria, the Islamic State's de facto capital, where it was easier to get food, and smuggling themselves from there to Turkey.
The Islamic State alternately courted those who remained with free bread and terrorized them with arbitrary punishments. Palmyra's ancient amphitheater was used for a mass killing of captured government fighters. Residents now fear that returning government forces might carry out their own reprisals -- accusing them of sympathizing with the Islamic State.
The cafe owner said that his workers had hidden the store's tobacco in water pipes in the basement, because of the Islamic State's disapproval of smoking on religious grounds. He said they kept the cafe open only to sell dates, which are hung to dry from strings stretched across the restaurant.
But Islamic State fighters, he said, recently closed the cafe and tortured one waiter \"because the owner, who is me, used to feed the army with dates and tea.\"
By all accounts, the recent fighting has been fierce, with major resources invested. The Russian government has said its warplanes are conducting 25 sorties in support of the offensive.
The United States-led coalition has also been involved in operations near the city.
On Thursday, it reported carrying out one airstrike \"near Palmyra\" in the previous 24 hours, edging closer than usual to concerted battlefield action with Russia.
A Syrian soldier interviewed on state television outside Palmyra declared that the forces would take Palmyra and move beyond it, \"God willing, to Raqqa, the center of the gangs of Daesh.\"
Credit: ANNE BARNARD; Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and Maher Samaan from Paris.
Photograph
President Bashar Al-Assad of Syria in Damascus Recently. He has Long Contended That He Is Defending Civilization Against Extremists Like the Islamic State. (Photograph by Sana Handout/European Pressphoto Agency)
Word count: 1038
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 25, 2016"
