"We may never know how Dylann Roof got so twisted. Or even begin to understand why the boy who had black friends turned into the man who waited until his African-American victims had closed their eyes in prayer to slaughter them like the animals he had come to believe they were.
But what we do with him now will say a lot more about who we are than it does about him.
The jurors deliberated for less than two hours before convicting the blank-eyed 22-year-old of killing nine believers while they were doing what Christ asks of all his followers -- welcoming the stranger among them into their Bible study group in Charleston, S.C. When the jurors reconvene next Tuesday, they must make the far more difficult call of whether Roof should be executed or spend his life in prison.
Questions raised by the case touch on a tangle of intractable issues -- race and rage, guns and mental illness, what constitutes terrorism and what we can do about self-radicalization on the Internet. Yet the racism that Roof spewed seems to have eclipsed all. Many who generally agree with me that capital punishment is in all cases wrong are silent now. Or they're willing to make an exception when it's a deluded white supremacist like Roof on trial instead of a deluded Muslim terrorist like Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, sentenced to death in the Boston Marathon bombings.
The legal definition of insanity requires such a dramatic break from reality that the accused no longer knows that what he's doing is wrong.
And jurors won't even have to try and sort out where free will ends and compulsion begins. The judge in the case kept them from hearing the evidence of mental illness, and they will never hear it now, because Roof intends to represent himself during the punishment phase of the trial.
He's doing it to keep jurors from hearing information that might embarrass him, his lawyers have said. Surely, worrying about embarrassment while on trial for one's life is itself evidence of a serious imbalance. But one of the symptoms of the paranoid schizophrenia that Roof's defense team has suggested he suffers from is an unwillingness to believe he has a mental illness.
It's true we get capital cases wrong all the time, but Roof's guilt is not in question. We don't administer the ultimate penalty fairly, either, but we tend to favor defendants like him who are white and have excellent lawyers.
At some point, I hope we'll acknowledge the difficult truth that while very few people with a mental illness ever hurt anyone, evil actions aren't always freely chosen. As a society, however, we do get to choose -- and we ought to admit that even when the guilty man is a self-styled race warrior, an \"eye for an eye\" justice makes killers of us all.
Vengeance on Roof seems a particularly poor way to honor his victims, whose families so quickly and publicly forgave him.
Melinda Henneberger, a political writer and a visiting fellow at Catholic University of America's Institute for Policy Research & Catholic Studies, is a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors.
Word count: 548
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
