"If some Americans had not registered just how brutal the Islamic State was before August 2014, the group's videotaped beheading of James Foley that month certainly drove the point home. Mr. Foley, 40, a freelance American journalist, became a symbol of sorts, evidence that the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, was an unscrupulous enemy that could not be ignored.
\"Jim: The James Foley Story,\" a documentary airing Saturday night on HBO, seeks to reclaim the person at the center of this awful story, with friends, family members and fellow journalists speaking admiringly of Mr. Foley and leaving even those who never knew him with a sense of loss. The film is by Brian Oakes, a longtime friend of Mr. Foley's, so there's never much doubt about its intent, and it certainly paints Mr. Foley as a likable, intrepid fellow. But the film isn't interested in going much further, into lingering questions about the United States government's handling of hostage situations or the wisdom of the type of journalism Mr. Foley practiced.
Mr. Foley was unusual in that he was taken prisoner once before, in Libya in 2011, and after his release soon went back into harm's way. He was kidnapped in Syria in November 2012 and ended up being held with a number of other prisoners, some of whom are interviewed in this film. Their descriptions of how they helped one another endure the long months of imprisonment -- a game they made up, conversations they had -- are the film's most compelling moments.
\"We invented a life during these months in captivity,\" says Nicolas Hénin, a French journalist who was held for 10 months. \"And when you invent a life, you have to invent also a family.\"
The film, though, doesn't poke too deeply into why these former hostages are alive to tell the tale and Mr. Foley isn't. (There are many factors, including things like policies on paying ransom.) It also skirts the difficult subject of whether his efforts were worth the cost or are the best way, in the age of citizen journalism and cellphone cameras, to learn what is going on in lawless parts of the world.
We see only brief glimpses of Mr. Foley's actual reports and are given no sense of whether, in the grand scheme of things, they were indispensable. Mr. Foley (in film clips) and colleagues he traveled with speak about the addictive adrenaline rush of going into danger zones and about how the people they reported on affected them personally. Yet there is no exploration of whether the old model of the fearless journalist chasing the story at any cost needs to be re-examined when groups like ISIS use captives as pawns.
So expect to shed a tear for Mr. Foley and his family by the time this film is over. But also expect a lot of questions raised by his story to remain.
Photograph
Jim: The James Foley Story: Mr. Foley, the Subject of an Hbo Film On Saturday, Was Murdered by Isis. (Photograph Via Hbo)
Word count: 529
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 6, 2016"
