"Current federal law does not disqualify those onthe government's terrorist watchlist from purchasinga gun from a licensed gun dealer. Senate Democrats,who are hoping to resurrect legislation defeatedby Republicans last year to address the so-calledterror gap in federal gun laws, began a filibuster onWednesday to pressure Republicans on the issue.
Democrats tried to passsuch a law in December.
In December, the Denying Firearms and Explosives to Dangerous Terrorists Act of 2015 amendment was blocked by Republicans (and one Democrat) in the Senate.
60 votes
needed to pass
45
YES
NO
54
44 Democrats, 1 Republican
53 Republicans, 1 Democrat
The legislation would have given the attorney general authority to deny the sale of a firearm \"to a known or suspected terrorist if the prospective recipient may use the firearm or explosive in connection with terrorism,\" according to a news release by Senator Dianne Feinstein, the Democrat from California who offered the amendment.
The government currently uses a central watchlist administered by the F.B.I. to track known terrorists and terrorism suspects.
Another December proposal offered by Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, which would have delayed gun purchases by people on the watchlist and given the government 72 hours to investigate them, won more votes than the Democratic version, but also failed. Mr. Cornyn's proposal is also backed by the National Rifle Association.
There is debate over whetherthis particular law would haveprevented Omar Mateen, the Orlandogunman, from buying his guns.
Mr. Mateen was on a federal terrorist watchlist while being investigated by the F.B.I. in 2013 and 2014, but he was removed after the investigation ended, according to the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey.
If the 2015 legislation had passed and the F.B.I. relied entirely on the watchlist, he would not have been blocked from buying guns from a licensed dealer this month.
But the legislation does not specifically require that someone be named on a particular watchlist to be considered a known terrorist or a suspect, so it is possible that Mr. Mateen could have been flagged under other procedures implemented by the attorney general.
The Justice Department is considering procedures that would alert investigators if someone who had been on a terrorist watchlist tried to buy a gun, according to Sally Q. Yates, the deputy attorney general.
Currently, most people on the watchlistwho attempt to buy guns are approved.
The consolidated federal terrorist watchlist had 800,000 people (mostly non-Americans) on it as of September 2014, including 64,000 on a subset referred to as the \"no-fly\" list, which bars air travel to, from or within the United States.
While inclusion on the list does not disqualify people from purchasing weapons, prospective gun buyers are screened against the terrorist watchlist, and matches are forwarded to F.B.I. agents, who can use the information to help with investigations. Last year, 244 background checks involved people on the list.
According to a study by the Government Accountability Office using data collected by the F.B.I., the vast majority of those on the watchlist who attempted to buy a gun from 2004 to 2015were allowed to proceed, because they were not stopped by a disqualifying factor like a history of criminal or mental health problems.
Number of F.B.I. background checks for gun purchases involving people on the terrorist watchlist
300
Denied
250
200
150
100
50
Allowed to proceed
'04
'05
'06
'07
'08
'09
'10
'11
'12
'13
'14
'15
Beginning in Feb.
Statistics were incomplete
The F.B.I. has been criticized in the past for being too slow to purge people from the watchlist, and opponents of the legislation cite the fact that those on it have no opportunity to contest their inclusion in court.
Some security experts have also warned against blocking those on the list from purchasing guns because suspects would be alerted that they are under scrutiny. Other proposals include only barring those on the \"no-fly\" list, who already are aware of their status.
Even if a law closing the terrorgap were passed, known terroristsor suspects could still buy gunsfrom a private seller in most states.
Even if the Orlando gunman had been denied the purchase of guns from a licensed dealer because of his connections to terrorism, he could have still obtained weapons legally from a private seller at a gun show or online, because federal law does not require a background check for private purchases.
While some states have their own laws requiring a background check or a permit (issued after a background check) in private sales, Florida is not one of them.
Background check
on private sale
Not required
ME
AK
VT
NH
MA
WA
MT
ND
SD
MN
WI
MI
NY
CT
RI
NE
IA
IN
PA
OR
ID
WY
IL
OH
NJ
KS
WV
CA
NV
UT
CO
MO
KY
DC
MD
DE
AZ
NM
OK
AR
TN
VA
NC
Handgun
only
HI
TX
LA
AL
GA
SC
MS
FL
Source: Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence
The Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, a gun safety advocacy group, wrote a letter to senators when the terror gap legislation was being considered in December, saying that while the measure was important, it was \"not nearly enough\" because it did not address the loophole that allowed people to buy guns from private sellers in most states without a background check.
Chart
Charts
Word count: 903
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 16, 2016"
