"In 2006, I moved to Brussels. It was a lark, a whim, a crazy idea to move to a country where I knew no one and had never visited. I remember the first day that we rolled out of the Eurostar train station with our bags and a hotel reservation but nowhere to live. We were set to be there for a year, and things were still being ironed out. It was a cold, dreary day, and I thought, My God, we left Los Angeles for this?
But it was only a few weeks before we were settled into our life in Brussels. We found a great flat in a nice neighborhood, and we were blessed to meet many wonderful people. We quickly learned about a city divided by language. Apparently, there was a long rivalry between the Flemish and the French. The argument raged on during our time in Brussels as to which was the \"official\" language of Belgium. Was it French or Flemish? This was the biggest concern at the time.
We lived in a heavily Muslim neighborhood, and the residents often joked that we were the aliens from America who had landed on their porch. Regardless of our differences, these people invited us to eat in their homes, to come to their shops and to learn about where they were from.
It was not an easy task, bridging these cultural gaps and breaking stereotypes. It took six months for us to convince the owner of a shop we frequented to take down a picture of a burning American flag. I learned the deep meaning of the hijab (head covering) from the many women who became my friends. These were women who had moved to Brussels because they were forced out of their own countries. Their deepest concerns resonated through me then and still do today -- they would say, \"We are not all terrorists, we are not all extremists. We have our beliefs and you have yours. Why can't we just leave it at that?\"
This was the message they wanted me to bring home. They told me they chose to live amongst themselves in tight Muslim neighborhoods because the Belgians kept to themselves. They worried about the future -- and rightly so. Look where we are 10 years later. These neighborhoods of Brussels close to where I once lived are under fire for housing terrorists.
How did it come to this? And what are we going to do about it? In 2007, I went to a party on Avenue Max Roos. The building was oddly shaped and different from others on the street, so I was shocked to see it plastered on every news outlet last week. Apparently, while we were having parties, terrorists were living in the same building making bombs.
I don't claim to know the answers. I just know what I have seen. When I see Paris or Brussels under fire by young terrorists who don't value their own lives, much less anyone else's, I reflect on the times I spent in these neighborhoods that you hear so much about on the news: Malbeek, Schaerbeek, the 10th Arrondissment. I think of the people I met and their concerns and fears.
I know it is a false sense of security to believe these acts of terrorism are not going to happen in other cities. This month alone, we have seen attacks in Turkey, Mali, Brussels and now Lahore, Pakistan. My question is how can we work together to stop acts of terrorism from continuing, because at the end of the day, is this the kind of world we want to live in?
Regardless of religion or race or sex, we are all humans on this planet that we share. Let's think about how we can make changes instead of debating who is at fault, which religion or set of beliefs is better. Instead, let's talk about what we can do to make a difference, no matter how small the gestures may seem. Get to know your neighbors. Get to know your community.
I am not one for posting on a public forum my political or ideological thoughts or opinions. But I feel like this is too important to ignore as I watch places I once called home fall victim to terrorists like my birthplace, New York, once was. It moves me to broach the topic: What can we as individuals do to stop these acts of terrorism? We need to come up with an answer.
I don't know about you, but I don't want to live in a world where terrorists are given daily airtime.
DePasquale is a television producer/writer who lives in New York and Europe.
Illustration
photo Sylvain Lefevre, Getty Images
Word count: 820
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
