"The torrent of mistakes that led an American military gunship to obliterate a hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan, last October, killing 42 innocent people and wounding dozens, resulted from gross negligence, judging from the findings of a report the Pentagon released on Friday.
And yet, military officials have refused to identify the individuals responsible for the disaster and to explain what type of punishment each will face. The Pentagon also appears to have ruled out the possibility of holding them accountable in a court of law for one of the most egregious war zone blunders in recent history.
Those decisions are deeply troubling. Gen. Joseph Votel, the commander of the military's Central Command, or Centcom, told journalists on Friday that the service members who made the mistakes would not face criminal prosecution because investigators determined that their errors were unintentional.
According to the report, the gunship crew failed to locate the intended target and fired on the Doctors Without Borders hospital assuming that it was a building occupied by Taliban fighters. Senior officers approved the strike despite having the coordinates of the hospital. Equipment and communication failures that night contributed to the catastrophe, and the airstrike did not stop immediately after Doctors Without Borders alerted the United States government of the error.
Gen. John Campbell, the commander of American troops in Afghanistan at the time, concluded that some service members had flouted the rules of engagement and violated the law of armed conflict, Centcom said in a statement. However, Pentagon officials determined that they would not face criminal charges because of their lack of intent.
Human rights advocates and Doctors Without Borders rightly point out that under the American military code and international laws of war, fatal mistakes that result from recklessness and gross negligence can constitute crimes.
\"The threshold that must be crossed for this deadly incident to amount to a grave breach of international humanitarian law is not whether it was intentional or not,\" Meinie Nicolai, the president of Doctors Without Borders, said in a statement. \"With multinational coalitions fighting with different rules of engagement across a wide spectrum of wars today, whether in Afghanistan, Syria, or Yemen, armed groups cannot escape their responsibilities on the battlefield simply by ruling out the intent to attack a protected structure such as a hospital.\"
General Votel said on Friday that the military would not identify the 16 service members who were disciplined out of concern for their privacy and because some of them are currently deployed overseas in sensitive areas. That is a ridiculous reason to shield those responsible from full accountability for their actions.
Pentagon officials say that after the hospital strike they acted promptly to retrain all troops in Afghanistan about the rules for using deadly force and that they have taken precautions to ensure that all armed aircraft are programmed with a list of facilities that should not be struck, including hospitals. The Defense Department has also allocated $5.7 million to rebuild the hospital. Those are certainly necessary steps.
But the American government must do more to compensate the families of the dead and wounded. Earlier this year, the military offered $6,000 for each person killed and $3,000 to each of those injured. Those sums are an utterly inadequate recompense for the lives and livelihoods lost in one of the most monumental mistakes of the recent wars.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
Credit: THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Word count: 595
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 30, 2016"
