"Europe's top police agency warned Monday that the Islamic State will try to launch more deadly attacks in 2016.
The warning came as Europol opened a new European Counter Terrorism Centre, created in response to the Nov. 13 Paris attacks in which nine assailants killed 130 people.
The opening comes after the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS, released a video claiming to show the Paris suspects as they carried out beheadings earlier in Syria and delivered threats to their enemies.
\"There is every reason to expect that IS (the Islamic State), IS-inspired terrorists or another religiously inspired terrorist group will undertake a terrorist attack somewhere in Europe again, but particularly in France, intended to cause mass casualties among the civilian population,\" Europol said in its report.
The report by the European Union's chief law enforcement agency makes clear that virtually anyone in Europe could be at risk, according to the Associated Press.
\"Without reliable intelligence on the intentions, activities and contacts and travels of known terrorists, it is nearly impossible to exactly predict when and where the next terrorist attack will take place, and what form it will take,\" the Europol report said.
Rob Wainwright, director of Europol, said 5,000 European nationals had left to fight with militant groups in Syria and Iraq, and they pose significant threats upon returning to their countries, according to the Deutsche Welle newspaper in Germany.
\"Our ambition is for the (new terrorism center) to become a central information hub in the fight against terrorism in the EU, providing analysis for ongoing investigations and contributing to a coordinated reaction in the event of major terrorist attacks,\" Wainwright said at a news conference.
The grisly video, released Sunday, is spoken mostly in French but ends with a threat in English to commit more attacks against all who participate in the U.S.-led coalition conducting airstrikes against Islamic State fighters in Syria.
The video includes footage of British Prime Minister David Cameron giving a speech, with a warning from the Islamic State that whoever stands with the unbelievers \"will be a target for our swords.\"
Also shown is extensive footage of the Paris attacks from TV news and social media.
Several frames show digitized crosshairs superimposed over security officers in Paris and U.S. fighter jets taking off from an aircraft carrier.
The Europol report said the Islamic State represents \"the most significant terrorist threat in over 10 years\" to face Europe.
Dimitris Avramopoulos, the European Commissioner for Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship, called on EU member states to support the new counterterrorism center, which he called \"a major strategic opportunity for the EU.\"
Credit: Oren Dorell, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Bart Maat, European Pressphoto Agency
Word count: 483
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
