"CORRECTION APPENDED. CAIRO -- As photographs and video footage emerged on Monday from the ancient Syrian city of Palmyra, antiquities experts were relieved and horrified at what Islamic State militants had wrought in the months they had controlled the city.
A day after Syrian government troops retook control of the city, the most hopeful appraisal came from Maamoun Abdulkarim, Syria's antiquities director, who said 80 percent of the Unesco World Heritage site that encompasses the 2,000-year-old ruins remained intact. He said that the militants appeared to have deliberately slowed their assault on the ruins, fearing that they would stir a revolt among the local population.
But archaeologists abroad expressed shock at the damage inside the Palmyra Museum, where Syrian state television showed shattered statues and other artifacts torn from their mountings and damage apparently caused by shelling.
The damage to the museum was \"severe,\" said Michael D. Danti, a professor of archaeology at Boston University. \"The release of video and photography of some of the galleries shows substantial damage to the buildings,\" he wrote in an email message, adding that there was evidence that the Islamic State had \"carried out acts of deliberate destruction of sculptures.\"
Syrian government troops fully captured the city on Monday, after a three-week assault supported by Russian air power. The expulsion of the Islamic State, whose tenure in Palmyra was marked by public beheadings and the attacks on its heritage, prompted a sense of collective relief rare during Syria's five-year-plus war.
In an episode that came to define the militant's occupation of the city -- and their violent disdain for its residents and Palmyra's cultural legacy -- the militants publicly executed Khalid al-Asaad, who had worked for decades as the city's head of antiquities, possibly because he refused to reveal the locations of ancient artifacts.
The years of combat between the government and its opponents have killed more than 200,000 people and displaced more than half of Syria's population. Amid the carnage, many Syrians have continued working, often in vain, to protect the country's historical sites from heavy weapons and other threats, including looters.
The worries for the ancient treasures in Palmyra, an oasis city in Syria's central desert, began even before the Islamic State captured the city in May. The Temple of Baal, one of the ancient city's best-preserved sites, had been damaged by mortar fire, and grave robbers had stolen artifacts from tombs.
Within months of taking control of the city, Islamic State militants had destroyed the temple's primary building and other structures, as well as the nearby Temple of Baalshamin. In October, they destroyed decorative arches dating to the second century, built by the Romans.
But in contrast to the gleeful videos the militants have released detailing their destruction of ancient artifacts in other places, they had made little attempt to publicize their actions in Palmyra. Mr. Abdulkarim said that in October, after the militants destroyed the arches, the Islamic State had begun to regard its campaign as potentially dangerous provocation to locals, for whom the ancient city was not just a treasure, but also a central pillar of the local economy.
Mr. Abdulkarim, who works in Damascus, said he had pushed residents to warn the Islamic State to stop the destruction, delivering the message through employees of his ministry still working in Palmyra, as well as the family of Mr. Assad, the murdered antiquities head.
\"I think Daesh understood very strongly that if they continued to destroy buildings, they would be attacked by the local community,\" he said, using an Arabic acronym for the Islamic State.
Mr. Abdulkarim said that the damage to Palmyra's medieval citadel, including to a bridge and a wall, could be repaired within two years. Blocks from the triple arch are in good condition, and they can also be rebuilt, he said. The restoration of the two temples, along with funerary towers that had been destroyed, will take years, and will require support from Unesco, he said.
Professor Danti, who is also a director of an initiative focused on documenting and protecting the cultural heritage of Northern Iraq and Syria, said that while the damage had been expected, it was \"both severe and extensive with some monuments in better condition and some worse than expected.\"
The sculptures in the museum had suffered, \"but most if not all can be reconstructed,\" he said. \"We can say the same for Palmyra's major monuments, but debates over authenticity, priorities, and motivation will not be far behind,\" he said.
Correction: April 12, 2016, Tuesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on March 29 about an assessment of the damage done by the Islamic State to the ancient Syrian city of Palmyra referred incorrectly to the second-century triple arch ISIS destroyed. The arches were decorative, not triumphal, and therefore were not built by the Romans to celebrate their victory over the Persians. The errors also appeared in another article on March 29, as well as in a picture caption, about efforts to create three-dimensional digital models of Palmyra's threatened monuments in case the originals are damaged beyond repair, and the errors were repeated last Tuesday in a photo essay and in a caption by a Times photographer who visited Palmyra to document the destruction. The errors also appeared in an article and a picture caption on Oct. 6, 2015, about ISIS' destruction of the arches.
Credit: KAREEM FAHIM; Sarah Almukhtar contributed reporting from New York.
Photograph
Syria's Antiquities Director, Maamoun Abdulkarim, Said 80 Percent of the Unesco World Heritage Site Encompassing the Ancient Ruins of Palmyra Was Intact. (Photograph by Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images); Most of the Damaged Sculptures in the Palmyra Museum Can Be Reconstructed, Said Michael D. Danti, an Archaeology Professor. (Photograph by Sana, Via European Pressphoto Agency); Palmyra's Ancient Theater. The City, Captured by Isis in May, Was Recaptured by Syrian Government Troops On Sunday. (Photograph by Maher Al Mounes/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 1012
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 29, 2016"
