"Awkward questions will now be asked about whether focus on Kurdish threat is misdirected and politically motivated
Tuesday's terrorist attack in central Istanbul has confirmed Turkey's precarious position on the frontline of the escalating confrontation between Islamic State and western and Arab governments. Isis suicide bombers were behind at least two similar atrocities in Turkey last year -- in the capital, Ankara, and at the Syria-Turkey border town of Suruc.
But even as Turkey is increasingly drawn into the firing line of Syria's civil war and the region-wide struggle against Sunni Muslim extremism, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey's combative and choleric president, remains stubbornly fixated on a wholly different foe -- the Kurds. It is this battle, deliberately ramped up last summer in the heat of a rerun general election, that is Erdogan's obsession, blind spot, and top priority.
Even as the terrorists were preparing their attack on Istanbul's famous Sultanahmet tourist district, Ahmet Davutoglu, Turkey's prime minister and loyal Erdogan acolyte, was looking the wrong way. He told a weekend meeting of the ruling Justice and Development party (AKP) that the security forces' lethal crackdown in indigenous Kurdish minority areas would continue indefinitely.
\"We will pursue our anti-terror fight with great determination until... our mountains, plains and towns are cleansed of these killers,\" Davutoglu said. But the \"killers\" he was talking about were fighters from the pro-autonomy Kurdistan Workers' party (PKK), not Isis jihadis.
The scale of current violence in Kurdish areas dwarfs Isis's Turkish depredations. Security forces killed 32 alleged PKK members at the weekend alone. The army says 448 militants have died since new operations and curfews were launched last month.
Erdogan brags that Turkish forces killed 3,100 alleged PKK members in 2015. The main pro-Kurdish political party, the People's Democratic party (HDP), says 161 civilians have also been killed in recent weeks, while thousands have been displaced.
The president's enmity runs deep. After last October's double suicide bombing in Ankara that killed 103 people, most of whom were Kurds and opposition activists, Erdogan suggested Kurdish militants were jointly responsible with Isis. His claim was widely derided and quickly dismissed.
Speaking after Tuesday's attack, Erdogan avoided making the same mistake, pointing the finger firmly at Isis. \"I strongly condemn the terror incident that occurred in Istanbul ... which has been assessed as being an attack by a Syria-rooted suicide bomber,\" he said.
Erdogan's statement appeared to lay to rest any possibility that Kurds might be blamed, in particular an extremist faction known as the Freedom Falcons. As for the PKK itself, analysts noted it has no history of attacks on civilian targets in major Turkish cities and would view such action as counterproductive.
The conclusion thus appears inescapable: the Istanbul atrocity represents another damaging and costly security failure to be laid squarely at Erdogan's door. Awkward questions will now be asked about whether his focus on a Kurdish threat is misdirected and politically motivated -- and whether more urgent attention must now be paid to the terrorist menace emanating from Syria and Iraq.
Such a shift would be welcomed by Turkey's allies. Erdogan's neo-Islamist government has long been suspected of offering covert support to militant Sunni Muslim groups that share its aim of ousting Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad. There have been persistent reports, always denied, of Turkish security establishment links to Isis and of complicity in Isis's covert export of Syrian oil via Turkey.
Erdogan's reluctance to assist Iraqi and Syrian Kurds fighting Isis, notably during the siege of Kobani in northern Syria in 2014, angered the western allies. After lengthy resistance, he finally bowed last year to American pressure to allow coalition aircraft to use Turkish bases in operations against Isis.
Erdogan has also been criticised by EU countries for pursuing his vendetta with the Kurds while failing to stem the northwards flow of Syrian refugees and the southwards flow of Isis recruits from Europe and North America. In the event, Erdogan was bought off with EUR3bn in EU financial assistance in return for Turkey doing more to prevent Syrian refugees migrating to Greece and the Balkans.
Turkey's interior minister, Efkan Ala, said at the weekend that new anti-Isis border measures were in place. Ala said Turkey had captured and deported 2,896 people with suspected Isis links.
Such measures cannot completely stop Isis terrorists slipping into Turkey, recruiting sympathisers there, or travelling north into Europe, with the sort of dire consequences witnessed in Istanbul and elsewhere.
Nor will they mitigate the negative psychological and economic impact of such instability on Turkey's lucrative tourist industry. Like Tunisia and Egypt after last year's Isis attacks, Turkey's appeal as a holiday destination has just been badly dented.
By targeting Istanbul, and in particular Sultanahmet, home of the Blue Mosque and Hagia Sophia, the terrorists have struck a deadly and costly but above all symbolic blow at the conflicted heart of Erdogan's Turkish state.
Credit: Simon Tisdall
Word count: 800
(Copyright , Guardian Newspapers Limited, Jan 12, 2016)"
