"KABUL, Afghanistan -- Two bombings struck near Kabul's international airport on Monday, killing one and injuring more than 20, Afghan officials said.
The more powerful of the attacks was in the evening, when a truck full of explosives was rammed into the wall of a compound for foreign and Afghan civilian contractors called Camp Baron, said Abdul Basir Mujahid, a spokesman for the Kabul police. One person was killed and 22 others wounded in the attack, all of them civilians, he said. Witnesses reported extensive damage in the area.
Earlier in the day, a suicide bomber detonated his vest near the entrance to the airport, but the vehicle he was driving in, also laden with explosives, did not blow up, security officials said. There were no other casualties.
The truck attack occurred just as an overnight siege of a building near an Indian Consulate in northern Afghanistan ended after 25 hours of fighting between militants and Afghan security forces.
The airport bombings follow a deadly attack Friday on a French restaurant in Kabul that had once been popular with foreigners.
The string of bombings in the Afghan capital comes days before a major meeting of senior officials from Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States and China to chart a course for the start of peace talks with the Taliban.
The attacks may be an attempt by the Taliban to gain more leverage if they join the talks, which Afghan and Pakistani officials say could happen within a matter of weeks.
The Taliban took responsibility for the evening attack in Kabul, but no group has claimed responsibility for the earlier bombing at the airport or the assault on the consulate.
In the consulate siege, which began on Sunday evening, a small group of militants occupied an empty house near the Indian Consulate in the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif in Balkh Province. Fighting continued all night, and Afghan commandos made a push in the morning to clear the house. Afghan Army helicopters were seen dropping commandos onto the roof of the building.
Officials declared the attack over after 25 hours of fighting, according to local news media reports. The siege left at least one police officer dead and nine people wounded, including three civilians.
All of the staff members at the Indian Consulate were safe, said Amar Sinha, India's ambassador to Afghanistan, on Twitter.
Dr. Muhammad Afzal Hadeed, the head of the provincial council, said the house had once been used by Americans, possibly working for an aid agency, and it had a secure room where insurgents could take cover.
\"The attackers hid themselves in that safe room, which made it too hard for the security forces to kill them,\" Dr. Hadeed said. \"The house is completely surrounded by the security forces. We don't care as much about the length of time as about avoiding casualties.\"
Credit: JAWAD SUKHANYAR and MUJIB MASHAL; Jawad Sukhanyar reported from Kabul, and Mujib Mashal from Colombo, Sri Lanka.
Photograph
A Man Wounded in One of Two Attacks Monday Near Kabul's International Airport. One Person Was Killed and 20 Others Wounded. (Photograph by Massoud Hossaini/Associated Press)
Word count: 538
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 5, 2016"
