"WASHINGTON -- A striking fact about post-9/11 life is that Americans can wake up and discover that they are already at war with yet another Islamist group in yet another part of the world -- based not on congressional debate but on an executive branch decision that the group is sufficiently linked to Al Qaeda.
So last week, when the Pentagon announced that an American airstrike on a Shabab training camp in Somalia had killed about 150 people it said were low-level fighters preparing to attack peacekeeping forces, it raised a crucial question: Is the United States now at war with the Shabab, too?
The short answer, several officials said, is no. But there turned out to be a twist that illustrates how the fight against terrorism keeps eroding limits on presidential war-making powers. The Obama administration thinks that the Authorization for Use of Military Force against the perpetrators of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, or A.U.M.F., enacted by Congress, covered the attack last week -- a claim legal scholars described as novel and worthy of attention.
First, some context. Over time, the executive branch has stretched the nearly 15-year-old authorization by Congress to justify military actions far from Afghanistan and against foes other than Al Qaeda and the Taliban. It has done so by deeming other groups to be part of or \"associated forces\" with Al Qaeda, including the Yemen-based Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the Syria-based Nusra Front, and the Islamic State, a former Qaeda affiliate in Iraq that Al Qaeda excommunicated.
As the distance has grown between the text of the 2001 authorization and the combat waged in its name, critics have called on Congress to vindicate its constitutional role in decisions about war and peace by modernizing it. But Congress has been too polarized and gridlocked to act, essentially acquiescing to the executive branch's interpretations of what the authorization covers.
Such legislative paralysis only reinforces the executive branch's inclination to stretch the law. President Obama originally made his claim that the authorization permitted him to attack the Islamic State, even though that group is Al Qaeda's enemy, because he saw Congress as too dysfunctional to hold a timely vote on any new war measure.
Against that backdrop, administration officials have long been arguing internally about whether the Shabab, as a group, are a Qaeda \"associated force\" and therefore part of the authorized war. The question is ambiguous because even though the Shabab share Qaeda ideology, many members are just focused on controlling Somalia. But some of them have Qaeda links and want to commit terrorist attacks abroad -- like the Shabab's attack on a Kenyan shopping mall in 2013.
For years, how the Shabab were defined has seemed at once crucial -- is the United States at war with a few dozen people in Somalia, or with thousands? -- and yet academic. In practice, the Obama White House has pursued a strategy of selectively targeting individual Shabab leaders who have Qaeda links.
But the enormous death toll of the March 5 airstrike, and the fact that its target seemed to be mere foot soldiers, suggested that something new might be happening that the public had a right to know about. So The New York Times pressed the Pentagon for an explanation.
In response, Lt. Col. Joe Sowers, a Pentagon spokesman, provided a statement indicating that the government has still not deemed the Shabab to be an \"associated force\" in the Qaeda war. Nevertheless, he said, the airstrike was \"authorized by the 2001 A.U.M.F.\" -- as were three smaller airstrikes last year in Somalia, on June 28, July 29 and Nov. 21, that have received scant attention.
All four strikes were undertaken \"in the tactical defense of U.S. and partner ground force units,\" he said, referring to the African Union peacekeeping force known as Amisom. Its mandate is to stabilize Somalia, and several dozen American troops are embedded with it as advisers.
The administration's position is that Mr. Obama had two motivations in dispatching the advisers: to help stabilize Somalia against the Shabab as a whole, and to help counter those elements within the Shabab who have Qaeda links. The second motive means that the authorization for force covers the entire mission.
And once forces deploy, the military can protect them. That includes hitting adversaries who are about to attack them as well as launching a pre-emptive strike against insurgents who pose what officials call a \"continuing and imminent\" threat, and who have briefly surfaced but probably will not be spotted again before a future attack.
The administration's theory raised another question: By that logic, may the United States target all Shabab fighters because they pose, by definition, a \"continuing\" threat to the peacekeepers and their advisers? (In January, Shabab fighters overran a peacekeeper base, killing as many as 100 Kenyan soldiers.)
But Robert S. Taylor, the acting Pentagon general counsel, said the theory did not go that far: Its \"limiting principle\" was the \"specificity of the intelligence\" indicating that the Shabab fighters killed on March 5 had been scheduled to depart the camp and attack in the near future.
\"This is not a totally expansive theory that 'Al Shabab folks are dangerous and they pose a risk whenever and wherever they are' -- that would be an unlimited principle,\" he said. \"Here there was a determination from the commander that this was the last, best opportunity to stop what was believed to be a very serious attack that there were no adequate defenses for.\"
Still, two legal scholars who previously worked on security issues for the government, Ashley Deeks of the University of Virginia and Robert Chesney of the University of Texas at Austin, portrayed the Obama administration's rationale as an innovation with significant implications for limits on a president's power to start a war.
Ms. Deeks noted that by citing the authorization in order to deploy counterterrorism advisers even when Al Qaeda was not the main focus, the executive branch would avoid any fight over whether the mission was subject to the War Powers Resolution's 60-day legal limit for certain dangerous missions that lack congressional authorization.
And Mr. Chesney said the government's arguments could \"boot strap\" any presidential dispatch of military advisers to trouble spots into authority for a direct combat role -- including missions with no connection to the authorization for force, like assisting African forces battling the Lord's Resistance Army.
\"Where couldn't the president just decide to use force on that model?\" he asked. \"According to this logic, if you have got a 'continuing and imminent threat' to those advisers, it sounds like you have a really broad aperture for pre-emptively attacking the threat.\"
Photograph
Shabab Fighters in 2011. An Airstrike On a Shabab Camp Last Week in Somalia Killed About 150. (Photograph by Mohamed Sheikh nor/Associated Press)
Word count: 1157
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 15, 2016"
