"OUAGADOUGOU, Burkina Faso -- As a receptionist at the grand Laico Hotel on the edge of downtown here, Zacharia Bagagnan, an uneducated 39-year-old, has a job his friends envy.
It is a struggle to find paying work at all in Burkina Faso, where unemployment is soaring. Yet Mr. Bagagnan's salary allows him to support his wife and three children, and he has even bought a home.
But like the other men and women here who stand behind the counters of hotels and restaurants, warmly greeting their largely foreign and elite clientele, Mr. Bagagnan fears his line of work may suddenly thrust him onto the front lines of a war with armed militants who could attack at any moment.
\"Sure, I'm scared,\" Mr. Bagagnan said on a recent evening as the Muzak version of \"Strangers in the Night\" played softly while foreign guests lined up for a buffet. \"But there aren't many jobs here.\"
Not far away, gunmen had burst into the Splendid Hotel and the Cappuccino Cafe on Friday night, setting off explosions and targeting people who had been sipping coffee or strolling through the hotel lobby. The North African affiliate of Al Qaeda claimed responsibility for the rampage, calling the hotel and cafe and their environs \"dangerous dens of global espionage\" and pledging further attacks.
Untouched pizzas and toppled bottles of Sprite still sit amid the cafe's broken glass and charred walls, testament to the sudden horror that unfolded here. Across the street were the charred remains of a dozen vehicles that had melted into the ground.
On Monday afternoon, President Roch Marc Christian Kaboré toured the carnage, accompanied by the president of Benin, Thomas Yayi Boni, who had come to offer sympathies.
In all, 29 people died in the attack, and dozens were wounded. Many were from abroad, passing through the capital city on business trips or volunteer missions. But at least one local employee was presumed dead. And it was not the first time Al Qaeda had targeted hotels in the region: Three hotel employees were among those gunned down when the same Qaeda branch attacked the Radisson Blu in Bamako, Mali, in November.
Since Friday's attack, employees across the city said they had been plotting escape routes should gunmen burst through the front door of their workplaces. The fear of attack was new to most of them, but none said they planned to quit -- chiefly because nearly no one else is hiring.
\"This won't change our daily lives at all,\" said Isadore Tapsoba, a receptionist at Relax Hotel, a short drive from the Splendid. \"What it will change is life for foreigners here.\"
In establishments popular with expatriates, conversation has turned to balancing security risks with familiar food and the comforts of a four- or five-star hotel. One American couple with a life-is-short attitude arrived at the Laico for vacation on Sunday night, forging on with their Burkina Faso trip after learning of the attacks during a layover in Paris.
Outside the Splendid on Monday morning, Viraj Dhumatkar, an information technology specialist from India, was trying to retrieve his luggage. It was still trapped inside as investigators combed through the hotel.
He said he and a Burkinabe colleague, Lassane Kientega, were in his first-floor room preparing to go out for the night when the attacks began. They lay on the floor, peeking out a curtain from time to time as shots rang out for hours. Finally, French soldiers rescued them.
Just one hour before the attack, Mr. Dhumatkar told receptionists at the Splendid that he planned to extend his stay in Ouagadougou. Now, he was planning to be on the next flight back to India.
Local workers said they did not have the luxury of leaving. They must carry on in a suddenly changed environment where anxiety reigns.
Just around the corner from the Splendid on Monday morning, Sali Nikiema, a 23-year-old waitress, confessed to feeling jittery as she opened the Brasserie Tino, another spot popular with foreigners. Ms. Nikiema was meeting her sister near the Splendid when the shooting began, and they ran for their lives.
\"Oh, I'm very scared,\" she said. Ms. Nikiema, a university student, uses her paychecks to support her extended family. Now, she wants to switch careers and become a secretary, but she doubts she can find work in an office.
Burkina Faso is one of the world's least developed countries, heavily reliant on agriculture, with most of its population living in the countryside. The falling prices of cotton and gold, and the Ebola outbreak in nearby countries, have stunted economic growth.
For locals, securing capital to start a business is nearly impossible, even without the maze of bureaucratic permits required to legally set up shop. Most businesses are owned by foreigners. The Ukrainian owner of the Cappuccino Cafe lost three members of his family in the attacks, including a young son.
For Burkinabes, hopes for improving the economy soared last fall when Mr. Kaboré won office in the first free and peaceful election in decades. The population was particularly heartened by the calm outcome after a brief and unsuccessful coup in the weeks before the vote.
Now, Mr. Kaboré is in full-on crisis mode, and his economic initiatives are likely to be stalled. But some workers were still optimistic.
\"This won't happen again,\" said Aruna Sourou, a safari guide with an air of confidence designed to reassure foreign clients. \"The government is doing its best.\"
But others were in a state of shock. Local newspapers offered phone numbers to call for psychological counseling, and hospital officials said they were treating dozens of people who were having trouble processing the attacks on the relatively peaceful country.
Just outside the city, relatives of Ahmed Sigué, a cashier at the Cappuccino Cafe who was still missing and presumed dead, sat on plastic chairs at his mud-brick home in near silence, greeting friends who came to offer condolences. It was a mourning ritual they had decided to carry out after extensive talks with investigators and a search of hospitals and the morgue turned up nothing.
Mr. Sigué's job offered him a salary that supported his wife and a sobbing infant inside the house. While the authorities have not named him as a victim, an official list of the dead describes one unknown body as only that of a black person followed by the words \"employee, Cappuccino.\"
Credit: DIONNE SEARCEY; Thibault Bluy and Herve Takao contributed reporting.
Photograph
The Cappuccino Cafe in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, On Monday. An Attack On Friday Left 29 People Dead and Dozens Wounded. (Photograph by Wouter Elsen/European Pressphoto Agency); Uneaten Pizzas On Cappuccino's Terrace. The North African Affiliate of Al Qaeda Claimed Responsibility for the Attack. (Photograph by Joe Penney/Reuters)
Word count: 1141
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 19, 2016"
