"Apple faces 11 additional government orders seeking access to criminal suspects' data in addition to the tech giant's legal battle with the FBI over the iPhone of the gunman in the San Bernardino terror attack.
Federal investigators in New York, California, Illinois, Massachusetts and Ohio have obtained court orders directing Apple to help federal investigators gain access to data on iPhones and iPads since early October, according to an Apple filing unsealed Tuesday in Brooklyn federal court. Apple said it had objected to or filed other legal responses to the orders, the Feb. 17 filing shows.
\"There has not been any final disposition thereof to Apple's knowledge, and Apple has not agreed to perform any services on the devices to which those requests are directed,\" company attorney Marc Zwillinger wrote.
Brooklyn federal prosecutors did not object to unsealing the document, which was filed in a case in which they are trying to compel Apple to help gain access to the iPhone data of Jun Feng, a defendant who pleaded guilty in October to a methamphetamine conspiracy. But the government characterized Apple's filing as misleading.
\"In most of the cases, rather than challenge the orders in court, Apple simply deferred complying with them, without seeking appropriate judicial relief,\" Assistant U.S. Attorneys Lauren Elbert, Ameet Kabrawala and Saritha Komatireddy wrote in a legal reply dated Monday.
In a case filed in California's southern federal district, \"Apple indicated that it would assist the government in accessing a passcode-locked device once the government provided it with a new copy of the order's language in a different format (embedded within the warrant rather than alongside it),\" the prosecutors wrote.
The tech giant only said it would seek court relief from the order in the San Bernardino-related case \"in light of the public attention\" focused on the matter, prosecutors wrote.
They characterized Apple's legal position as \"inconsistent at best\" and contended \"the overwhelming weight of law and precedent continues to support the government's application\" to compel the company's help in the Brooklyn investigation.
In the San Bernardino case, the FBI seeks Apple's help gaining access to the iPhone 5C used by Syed Rizwan Farook, the gunman who, with his wife, are suspected of killing 14 and injuring 22 in the Dec. 2 terror assault. The couple died in a shootout with law enforcement agents after the attack.
A federal magistrate in California ruled Feb. 16 that Apple must help the FBI try to get into Farook's iPhone by disabling a feature that would lock investigators out if they made 10 unsuccessful tries to determine the correct password.
Apple, the world's largest publicly-traded company by valuation, is fighting the order. Apple CEO Tim Cook said investigators are asking the company to create a new version of the iPhone operating system and install it on Farook's phone as a \"backdoor\" into obtaining its data.
\"In the wrong hands, this software . . . would have the potential to unlock any iPhone in someone's physical possession,\" Cook said.
The legal showdown pitting personal privacy against national security and law enforcement investigations has drawn supporters on both sides and sparked a national debate on the issue. Google, Facebook and other major tech firms have sided with Apple, and Microsoft founder Bill Gates this week said the issue would need congressional action.
An exclusive USA TODAY poll conducted by SurveyMonkey showed 51% of 1,093 people polled Feb. 18-19 supported the FBI request to have Apple help unlock Farook's phone.
Cook on Monday distributed an Apple employee email that urged the government to withdraw its legal request seeking to compel Apple's assistance. He wrote that the case \"could set a dangerous precedent that threatens everyone's civil liberties.\"
Instead, Cook wrote that the government could \"as some in Congress have proposed, form a commission or other panel of experts on intelligence, technology and civil liberties to discuss the implications for law enforcement, national security, privacy and personal freedoms. Apple would gladly participate in such an effort.\"
Credit: Kevin McCoy, @kmccoynyc, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo PHILIPPE HUGUEN, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 710
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
