"\"Fifty-six days,\" Rep. Mike Pompeo, R-Kan., intoned at a news conference Tuesday to unveil a House committee report on Benghazi. There is no way to understand the government's immediate response to the attack Sept. 11, 2012, in Libya, Pompeo said, \"without understanding this took place 56 days before a contested political election for president.\"
Almost the same could be said of the report Pompeo and other Republicans released. It can be understood only in the context of being released 132 days before the 2016 presidential election.
Everything about the Select Committee on Benghazi's two-year investigation has been political. Then-House speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, resisted creating such a committee until May 2015, when a conservative watchdog group uncovered a White House memo suggesting officials should stick to the story that the attack grew out of a protest, not planned terror activity. Boehner said the fact that the administration had not provided that memo to congressional investigators proved a new committee was needed. Seven Democrats voted in favor of creating the Benghazi committee, perhaps the last shred of bipartisanship the process would see.
By the time the Benghazi committee was up and running, there already had been seven congressional investigations, some of which had been both bipartisan and critical of the administration.
The Senate Intelligence Committee issued a bipartisan report in January 2014 that concluded the attacks were preventable, security at the facility was insufficient, and intelligence reports gave too much weight to the theory that the attacks were part of an organic protest.
The Senate Homeland Security Committee issued a bipartisan report two years earlier concluding the State Department failed to provide adequate security for the facility and intelligence agencies misunderstood threats on the ground.
This was not those reports. Democrats and Republicans feuded throughout about who could call witnesses, who would be included in witness interviews and what documents or people should be subpoenaed.
Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., famously said the Benghazi committee helped drag down Hillary Clinton's poll numbers.
The two sides issued competing reports 24 hours apart, neither having shown their version to the other. The Republican version had a few new details about the events and rafts of blame for why there were not more details. Clinton and the Obama administration stonewalled, the Republicans said, delaying the report by months. Committee members Pompeo and Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, issued a proposed addition to the report accusing the administration of trying to undercut the investigation, because the White House did not want to admit it knew all along the Benghazi attack was planned by radical Islamic extremists.
The Democratic report released Monday somehow got in 23 references to Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. This is largely because the Democratic report was not about the events surrounding the Benghazi attack but the events surrounding the committee investigating the Benghazi attack.
As a result of all this, there is plenty of material for two political parties to get what they want: talking points they can carry into the election season bashing the opposing party for putting propaganda over truth.
Credit: Paul Singer, @singernews, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo MICHAEL REYNOLDS, European PressPhoto Agency
Word count: 555
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
