"PARIS -- A third man has been charged in Belgium in connection with a foiled plot to stage a major terrorist attack in France, officials said Saturday.
Authorities across Europe have been conducting raids and arresting suspects since the March 22 bombings that left 32 dead at Brussels Airport and a Brussels subway station.
The man who was charged in connection with the thwarted plot was identified by the federal prosecutor's office in Brussels only by his initials, Y.A., a 33-year-old Belgian citizen. He was preliminarily charged with participation in the activities of a terrorist group. A judge ordered that he be detained.
Officials also announced that the airport will reopen Sunday with limited service.
Arnaud Feist, the chief executive of Brussels Airport, said Saturday that the country had been through \"the darkest days in the history of aviation in Belgium\" and that the airport's reopening was a \"sign of hope.\"
\"As of tomorrow, Sunday, Brussels Airport should be partially operational,\" Mr. Feist said at a news conference in a hotel near the airport, which is several miles northwest of Brussels. The airport had been closed since the attacks, in which two suicide bombers detonated explosives in the departures hall.
A police spokesman, Michaël Jonniaux, said there would be new security measures at the airport, including spot checks of vehicles and checks of people and baggage entering the airport terminal -- which will be open only to those with travel documents and identification. The airport police had previously complained about a lack of security, delaying the reopening.
Mr. Feist said that there will be three flights on Sunday -- to Faro, Portugal; Turin, Italy; and Athens -- and that passengers would be processed in temporary constructions. He added that for the time being, the airport would be accessible only by taxi or car.
Y.A. is the third person in Belgium to be charged as an accomplice of Reda Kriket, 34, a Frenchman who was arrested outside Paris on March 24.
French officials say Mr. Kriket had amassed an arsenal of weapons and bomb-making equipment -- including the type of explosive material that was used by suicide bombers who attacked Paris on Nov. 13 and Brussels on March 22. He was charged on numerous counts, including terrorist conspiracy and possession of weapons.
Mr. Kriket's arrest prevented an \"imminent\" attack on France, according to the country's interior minister and the public prosecutor in Paris.
Two other people have been arrested and charged in Belgium with helping Mr. Kriket: Abderahmane Ameroud, 38, and a man identified only as Rabah M., 34, both Algerian citizens. They were arrested in Brussels on March 25. Another man accused of being an accomplice, Anis Bahri, a 32-year-old French citizen, was arrested by the Dutch police in the port city of Rotterdam last Sunday at the request of the French authorities.
Mr. Kriket was convicted in absentia in July alongside Abdelhamid Abaaoud, the man believed to be the on-the-ground organizer of the Paris attacks, in the same Belgian court case involving a jihadist recruitment network.
But the plot Mr. Kriket was allegedly involved in was not connected to the attacks in Brussels or in Paris, according to French officials.
Credit: AURELIEN BREEDEN and SEWELL CHAN; Aurelien Breeden reported from Paris, and Sewell Chan from London.
Photograph
Officers Detaining a Man in Brussels Saturday. Marches Had Been Banned After a Group Announced Plans for an Anti-Muslim Rally. (Photograph by Geert Vanden Wijngaert/Associated Press)
Word count: 599
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 3, 2016"
