"A 25-year-old man in Rochester has been arrested and charged with preparing to stage a New Year's Eve machete attack on diners at a local restaurant on behalf of the Islamic State.
The man, Emanuel L. Lutchman, is accused of gathering knives, a machete, ski masks and zip ties as part of his plan to raid the restaurant and possibly kidnap someone, taking advantage of what a self-identified Islamic State member overseas described as his position \"behind enemy lines.\"
Mr. Lutchman appeared in federal court in Rochester on Thursday on a charge of attempting to provide material support and resources to the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, as he pursued a goal of joining the terrorist organization overseas.
\"This New Year's Eve prosecution underscores the threat of ISIL even in upstate New York but demonstrates our determination to immediately stop any who would cause harm in its name,\" William J. Hochul Jr., the United States attorney in Buffalo, said in a statement.
Earlier in December, a pizza shop owner in Rochester pleaded guilty to recruiting people and raising money for the Islamic State.
The criminal complaint against Mr. Lutchman describes how his hatred of life in the United States motivated attempts to contact Islamic State sympathizers and pull together support for a plot, despite his not having enough money to buy basic weapons or much apparent expertise in carrying out an attack.
The complaint says he has a criminal history dating from 2006, including a robbery conviction that led to a five-year prison term, as well as past contact with the authorities related to his mental health.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said in an interview on Time Warner Cable News that Mr. Lutchman converted to Islam during his stint in state prison and later developed radical beliefs on the Internet. \"The arrest of Emanuel Lutchman is an important reminder of the new normal of global terrorism,\" he said in a statement.
Information about a lawyer for Mr. Lutchman was not available.
The investigation relied on undercover informers, some of them paid by the government, who prodded Mr. Lutchman for details of his plan and said they would help him.
In conversations with a self-identified Islamic State \"brother\" overseas last Friday and Saturday, Mr. Lutchman discussed going to Syria, according to screen shots of the conversations Mr. Lutchman showed an informer. Mr. Lutchman, officials said, claimed to be starting to organize people \"to do operation for the sake of Allaah,\" prompting the Islamic State member to urge him to prove his loyalty by planning a New Year's Eve attack to kill \"1000000s of kuffar,\" or nonbelievers.
A few days later, according to the complaint, Mr. Lutchman sent an audio recording to an undercover informer in which he swore an oath of allegiance to the Islamic State leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.
Mr. Lutchman met with local informants about how to carry out the attack, discussing assassinating people and using a pressure cooker bomb. \"Cause I'm getting amped up, to accept the fact that's what I gotta do, cause I want to make hijra,\" he said in one conversation, referring to a migration to join the Islamic State, according to the complaint.
In part because he had no money, he said, Mr. Lutchman scaled back his plans, according to the complaint. On a drive with an informer, he pointed out a restaurant and bar in Rochester as a potential target of a knife attack, noting that his wife had a dagger and he knew someone who could sell him ski masks for $5.
The informer whom Mr. Lutchman had sent his oath of allegiance told him on Tuesday that he was pulling out of the operation, acting on the direction of investigators. Mr. Lutchman grew concerned, and said in text messages that he \"was thinking about stopping the operation.\"
But another informer urged him not to be discouraged, and that same day the informer and Mr. Lutchman went to a Walmart store in Rochester to buy supplies. They picked up two black ski masks, zip ties, two knives, a machete, duct tape, ammonia and latex gloves, according to the complaint. The informer had to pay the $40 for them because Mr. Lutchman did not have money.
\"It's going to get real after this,\" he told the informer. \"It's just you, me and the Lord.\"
Mr. Lutchman was arrested the next day by the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Rochester Joint Terrorism Task Force. Officials said he had recorded a video before the arrest in which he claimed responsibility for the planned attack.
Follow The New York Times's Metro coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the New York Today newsletter.
Credit: BENJAMIN MUELLER; Alain Delaqueriere contributed research.
Photograph
Emanuel L. Lutchman
Word count: 812
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 1, 2016"
