"WASHINGTON -- On the 14th anniversary of the arrival of the first Afghanistan war detainees at the American naval base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, the military announced Monday that it had repatriated a Saudi who had been held there without trial since the prison's earliest weeks.
The Saudi, Mohammad al Rahman al Shumrani, was captured in late 2001 and arrived at the base on Jan. 16, 2002, according to a leaked military dossier -- five days after the Bush administration opened the wartime prison. Mr. Shumrani was held as a wartime detainee and was never charged with a crime.
In 2009, a six-agency task force deemed Mr. Shumrani a detainee who could not be prosecuted but was too dangerous to release. But last September, a parole-like review board decided that he could be transferred to a Saudi rehabilitation program for lower-level Islamic extremists.
\"The board acknowledges the detainee's past terrorism-related activities but determined the detainee's threat can be adequately mitigated by Saudi Arabia,\" the board said, adding that Mr. Shumrani had indicated a strong desire \"to receive guidance from the clerics at the rehabilitation center about Islam and his willingness to submit to the authority of the Saudi government.\"
The transfer came as human rights protesters observed the anniversary of the prison's opening by calling for its closing in rallies outside the White House and at American embassies.
The transfer reduced the remaining detainee population to 103, of whom 44 are recommended for transfer, 49 are recommended for continued wartime detention without trial and 10 have been charged or convicted in the military commissions system.
Mr. Shumrani was the fourth detainee to leave the Guantánamo prison as part of what is expected to be a flurry of 17 transfers in early 2016, after transfers to Ghana and Kuwait this month.
Still, Congress has shown no appetite for lifting statutory obstacles to President Obama's plan for closing the prison by moving several dozen detainees who are not recommended for transfer to a prison in the United States.
Word count: 347
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 12, 2016"
