"WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration has disclosed its rules and procedures for targeting individuals for killing outside conventional war zones -- including with drones -- further lifting the secrecy surrounding one of its most disputed tactics for fighting terrorism.
The newly declassified document shows that if the top lawyers and leaders of the departments and agencies on the National Security Council agree that a proposed strike would be lawful and appropriate, the Pentagon or the Central Intelligence Agency can proceed.
If they disagree, or if the person to be targeted is an American citizen, the matter must go to the president for a decision.
President Obama issued the 18-page set of rules, sometimes called the drone strike \"playbook\" but formally known as the Presidential Policy Guidance, in May 2013. It was classified, although the administration publicly said it tightened standards for strikes -- including requirements that targets must pose a threat to Americans and the \"near certainty\" that there would be no civilian deaths.
The government had said this year that it intended to make the guidance public as part of a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit brought by the American Civil Liberties Union. It provided the document to the A.C.L.U. late Friday, and the organization posted it on its website Saturday morning.
\"From one perspective it might be seen as reassuring, because it makes clear that these decisions are considered by many different senior people,\" Jameel Jaffer of the A.C.L.U. said. \"On the other hand, the document drives home how bureaucraticized, and therefore normalized, this practice of killing people away from conventional battlefields has become.\"
Ned Price, a National Security Council spokesman, said in a statement Saturday, \"The president has emphasized that the U.S. government should be as transparent as possible with the American people about our counterterrorism operations, the manner in which they are conducted and their results.\"
He added, \"Our counterterrorism actions are effective and legal, and their legitimacy is best demonstrated by making public more information about these actions as well as setting clear standards for other nations to follow.\"
The release joins the disclosure last month of previously classified statistics showing the government's official count of the number of combatants and civilian bystanders killed in airstrikes where American troops are not engaged in regular combat. These places include the tribal areas of Pakistan as well as Somalia, Yemen and Libya.
The official death toll was significantly lower than estimates by independent groups that try to track such operations. And the government statistics did not break down bystander death numbers by year, so it was not possible to analyze the effects of Mr. Obama's 2013 changes, although the frequency of such airstrikes has dropped.
Airstrikes away from conventional battlefields, using both piloted aircraft and remotely operated drones, began to escalate toward the end of the George W. Bush administration and became a central counterterrorism tactic in Mr. Obama's first term.
It also attracted growing controversy among human rights groups as reports of civilian casualties soared in Pakistan and Yemen, and as the administration took the unprecedented step of targeting and killing an American citizen, Anwar al-Awlaki, without a trial. Mr. Awlaki, a New Mexico-born radical cleric accused of playing an operational role in terrorist plots by Al Qaeda's Yemen branch, was killed in a September 2011 drone strike.
In 2012, the president directed his administration to tighten procedures and standards, resulting in his May 2013 Presidential Policy Guidance and a major national security speech at National Defense University.
The framework of the procedures that emerged from that effort had been previously reported, but the reports relied on accounts from current and former officials. Now, with some redactions, the guidance itself has been made public, confirming those accounts and filling in gaps.
It shows, for example, that the operational agencies of the National Security Council -- meaning the Defense Department and the C.I.A. -- may nominate someone for proposed killing after a review by their top lawyers.
The National Counterterrorism Center then develops a report analyzing the intelligence about that person, and top lawyers across different security agencies deliberate over whether the person meets legal standards for attack.
The process then goes to the \"deputies committee,\" made up of the No. 2 officials at national security departments and agencies. They weigh such factors as whether it is feasible to halt the perceived threat short of killing a terror suspect, and the impact of a strike on \"the broader regional and international political interests of the United States.\"
The deputies make recommendations to their agency directors or department secretaries, who make up the \"principals committee.\" If they unanimously agree -- and if the target is not an American citizen -- the strike can proceed with notice to the president. Otherwise, the president must make the decision.
But the document also says the president may waive the rules in \"extraordinary cases.\" It cites when there is a \"fleeting opportunity\" and no time to follow the full review procedures, or a proposal to kill a suspect who \"poses a continuing, imminent threat to another country's persons.\"
The guidance shows that in the case of a capture, rather than the killing of a terror suspect, the administration generally prefers to let other countries handle detention. If that is unworkable, the United States will take custody and try to prosecute the suspect, it says, but adds, \"In no event will additional detainees be brought to the detention facilities at the Guantánamo Bay Naval Base.\"
Word count: 923
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 7, 2016"
