"It is a familiar claim by many Second Amendment defenders -- and, during the Obama administration, an increasingly popular one -- that unfettered gun rights are necessary to protect American citizens against the threat of a tyrannical government.
In addition to being a misreading of history, the claim is amusing hyperbole to those who have suffered under real-life tyrants. But this week's armed standoff at a federal wildlife sanctuary in eastern Oregon is showing how far a small, determined band of antigovernment zealots with lots of big guns will go to make their potentially deadly point.
Styling themselves as a militia, the group hijacked a peaceful protest over five-year prison sentences a federal court had imposed on two local ranchers for setting fires on federal land. Led by a man named Ammon Bundy -- whose father, Cliven, instigated his own armed confrontation with federal authorities over cattle ranching in Nevada in 2014 -- this hyperweaponized posse rolled into town and seized administrative buildings at the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge on Saturday. Mr. Bundy said they are willing to stay for \"as long as necessary,\" and that \"if force is used against us, we would defend ourselves.\"
The occupation is the latest outgrowth of a long-running movement by some ranchers and farmers who believe the federal government controls far too much land in Oregon, Nevada and other Western states. Mr. Bundy and his gun-toting comrades argue that a century of federal policies has driven many ranchers into poverty and destroyed the rural economy.
This is mostly nonsense. As part of its congressional mandate to balance commercial and environmental concerns, including conservation, the federal government imposes reasonable rules on how public land can be used for mining, logging and ranching. On the whole Washington has been a benevolent, even generous landlord.
There may be a good argument that the two ranchers in this case, Dwight Hammond and his son, Steven, were punished unreasonably harshly for their crimes. But the way to have this argument is through peaceful means, such as the original protesters were doing, or as the Hammonds themselves chose to do -- by reporting to prison and asking President Obama for clemency. Every day, citizens around the country sue or otherwise challenge the government over alleged violations of the law or the Constitution, and they do it without a rifle in their hand.
A democracy cannot function any other way. It thrives on principled disagreement, but it withers in the face of a loaded gun.
Such dangerous behavior also puts law enforcement in an impossible position: respond with force and people may well die; walk away -- as Bureau of Land Management officials did with Cliven Bundy -- and the extremists are only emboldened. (On Monday, according to The Guardian, federal authorities said they planned to shut off power to the buildings.)
Mr. Bundy and his band of militants have made few friends. Local law enforcement has told them to leave immediately. Many residents, even those who agree that the federal government owns and mismanages too much land, have strongly rejected Mr. Bundy's gun-happy tactics. The Hammonds' own lawyer disassociated his clients from the group. And while years of overheated antigovernment statements from right-wing politicians and media figures have helped to fuel exactly this sort of outburst, it is encouraging that many on the right have called for the militants to stand down. When Ted Cruz says you've gone too far, it's worth listening.
The simple message Mr. Bundy and his band must hear is this: If everyone with a gripe against the government responded by threatening federal officials with weapons, America would no longer be a nation governed by the rule of law. Their grievances, like everyone else's, can be addressed. But not before they put down the guns.
Credit: THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Word count: 645
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 7, 2016"
