"A powerful explosion on West 23rd Street in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan injured 29 people, shattered windows and prompted widespread street closures. The authorities later found a second suspicious device a few blocks away.
On Sunday night, pipe bombs were found near the train station in Elizabeth, N.J., according to a law enforcement official.
Here's what we don't yet know:
Who was responsible for the explosion.
A motive behind the explosion.
Why the site of the explosion was selected.
Here's what we do know :
Where was the explosion?
The police commissioner, James P. O'Neill, said it occurred in front of 131 West 23rd Street.
Officials said they believed the explosion had been caused by a homemade bomb that had been placed under a Dumpster.
Where was the second device found?
The authorities said a suspicious device was found on West 27th Street between Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue almost three hours after the explosion. Mr. O'Neill, speaking at Police Headquarters on Sunday, said the device was found by two state troopers performing a sweep of the area.
A photograph of the device that was shared on social media showed a silver piece of cookware with wires and a cellphone attached. The police confirmed that the photo was authentic.
BREAKING PHOTO! Here is the second device found by a NYSP Sgt. At 27 street and 7 Ave. investigation is ongoing pic.twitter.com/x7o9Rr30I3 -- New York City Alerts (@NYCityAlerts) September 18, 2016
What happened to that device?
The Police Department bomb squad removed the device around 2:25 a.m. and transported it to the department's firing range at Rodman's Neck in the Bronx, where they rendered it safe. The police said the device would be examined further at the F.B.I.'s lab in Quantico, Va.
What was the device found on Sunday in New Jersey?
Pipe bombs were found Sunday night near the train station in Elizabeth, N.J., a law enforcement official said. The mayor, J. Christian Bollwage, confirmed that a suspicious package containing \"wires and a pipe\" had been found by two men in the city, and said that the F.B.I. and the New Jersey State Police had been called in to investigate after a drone found that the item could be a bomb.
What was the nature of the injuries in New York?
Many of the injuries were caused by shrapnel from the explosion. One person was seriously hurt, officials said. By Sunday morning, all of those who had been admitted to local hospitals had been released.
Was this an act of terrorism?
On Sunday, the governor said that there was no evidence of an international terrorist connection to the explosion and that no groups had claimed responsibility. Still, Mr. Cuomo cautioned that it was early in the investigation and said that whether it was an act of terrorism depended on how the word was defined: \"A bomb exploding in New York is obviously an act of terrorism,\" he said.
Mr. de Blasio called the explosion \"an intentional act.\"
Are there any suspects?
Late Sunday night, two law enforcement officials said that investigators had stopped a car on the Belt Parkway in Brooklyn near the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge. Five people were taken to an F.B.I. office in Manhattan for questioning in the bombing investigation. One of the officials said that all or most of them may have been from the same family. No one has been charged, officials said.
Law enforcement officials also said on Sunday that there was a \"person of interest\" in the bombing, though it was unclear if that person had been identified.
What details were learned about the devices found in Chelsea on Saturday?
Both devices -- the one that exploded on West 23rd Street and the other that was found a few blocks away -- were filled with shrapnel and made with pressure cookers, flip phones and Christmas lights that set off an explosive compound, law enforcement officials said.
Is there a connection to an explosion Saturday in Seaside Park, N.J.?
Government officials said initially that they did not believe there was a link between the blasts in Seaside Park, N.J., and New York. But later on Sunday senior law enforcement officials said investigators were focusing more on the possibility that the two were connected. Still, the connection was not confirmed.
Robert K. Boyce, the New York Police Department's chief of detectives, also said that the police did not believe the blast in Chelsea was related to a mysterious explosion in Central Park in July, when a teenager from Virginia lost part of his leg.
What were the circumstances of the New Jersey explosion?
An improvised device exploded in a garbage can on Saturday in Seaside Park, near the course of a charity race to benefit members of the United States Marine Corps. The device went off at about 9:30 a.m., around the time the race was scheduled to have started. There were no injuries. Officials said that the race had been delayed for an unrelated reason and that there was no one on the course near the site of the explosion at the time.
Officials said that the device there consisted of three pipe bombs tied together, with a flip phone also used as a timing mechanism.
What streets and subway stations are closed in response to the Chelsea explosion?
Avenue of the Americas between West 14th and West 27th streets was still shut down on Sunday night, according to the police. West 23rd Street was closed between Fifth Avenue and Seventh Avenue. The subway station at 23rd Street and Avenue of the Americas remained closed early Sunday night.
Word count: 946
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 19, 2016"
