"KABUL, Afghanistan -- In a compromise bid to unite the ranks after months of infighting, the Taliban's new leader has appointed the brother and son of Mullah Muhammad Omar, the movement's deceased founder, to senior leadership posts, a spokesman for the insurgent group said on Tuesday.
The appointments are the latest move by the supreme Taliban leader, Mullah Akhtar Muhammad Mansour, to publicly consolidate his authority after a leadership struggle last summer.
Facing criticism or outright rebellion from field commanders who distrusted his ties to Pakistan and his handling of the succession, Mullah Mansour brutally quashed breakaway groups and sought to buy the support of other skeptical commanders, all while maintaining a publicity campaign that has portrayed the Taliban as united under his command, according to interviews with Taliban members. They spoke on condition of anonymity to avoid angering Mullah Mansour.
Now, the announcement that he had formally brought two of the most influential skeptics back into the fold -- Mullah Abdul Manan, the brother of Mullah Omar; and Mullah Muhammad Yaqoub, the founder's son -- was expected to help bring other dissenters into line right as the Taliban's annual offensive is expected to pick up momentum in Afghanistan.
A Taliban spokesman, Qari Yousuf Ahmadi, said in a phone interview on Tuesday that Mullah Manan and Mullah Yaqoub would both take seats on the Taliban's senior leadership council, widely known as the Quetta Shura, as well as other posts.
\"In addition to having membership in the leadership council, the leadership appointed Manan as head of Preaching and Guidance Commission, and Yaqoub as military commander responsible for 15 provinces in Afghanistan,\" Mr. Ahmadi said.
Both Mullah Manan and Mullah Yaqoub had been critical of what they saw as Mullah Mansour's manipulation of his ascent to supreme Taliban leader last July, accusing him of rigging the selection process that made him the new Amir ul-Momineen, or commander of the faithful. Other Taliban leaders have accused Mullah Mansour of covering up Mullah's Omar's death for at least two years as he consolidated his grip over the movement.
After initial vocal opposition, Mullah Manan and Mullah Yaqoub remained quiet for months as Taliban leaders and religious clerics went back and forth trying to mediate between the camps.
Threats, violence and resource-bullying have also come into play over the past year.
Mullah Mansour Dadullah, a Taliban commander who insisted that he would not accept Mullah Mansour's authority, was killed along with many of his men after heavy fighting in Zabul Province last year. Mullah Rasool, another leader of the splinter group, has reportedly been detained by the Pakistani military, elements of which are seen as having close ties to Mullah Mansour's Taliban.
More recently, Mullah Mansour has extended his crackdown on dissidents into several districts in Helmand Province, according to Mullah Abdul Manan Niazi, a spokesman for Mullah Rasool's breakaway faction.
\"For the last three days, some of our people engaged with Mansour's Taliban in Helmand and there were some casualties,\" Mullah Niazi said. \"Mansour is trying to eliminate every single person in his control area that he suspects.\"
It has helped that Mullah Mansour has long cornered the insurgency's resources, controlling its overseas fund-raising and much of its profits from the opium trade. Some commanders described how Mullah Mansour has threatened to cut off resources to dissenters, bringing many in line.
Last week, another powerful and disenchanted Taliban commander, Mullah Qayoum Zakir, was also reported to have finally pledged allegiance to the new leader. A former head of the insurgent's military commission, Mullah Zakir was long seen as a rival to Mullah Mansour. For months after the leadership announcement, Mullah Zakir refused to pledge allegiance, though fighters loyal to him continued to fight alongside Mullah Mansour's forces, according to Afghan officials and Taliban commanders.
What probably pushed Mullah Zakir's hand was that in recent months several of his commanders in Helmand felt the scarcity of resources and switched to establishing direct channels to Mullah Mansour, Taliban commanders said.
However, the handwritten letter of allegiance by Mullah Zakir that the Taliban published on their website was reserved in its tone, and suggested that his pledge was conditional and came only after an agreement to fix differences between him and Mullah Mansour that \"had Shariah basis\" -- a reference to Islamic law that seemed meant to slight Mullah Mansour's religious credentials. In another internal letter, Mullah Zakir spelled things out a little more: While Mullah Omar's word had carried unanimous authority, the new leadership needed to lay out clear guidelines for everything under Shariah law, seemingly opening the door for internal dissent on religious principle.
Seeking to shore up his claim to religious leadership of the Taliban, Mullah Mansour has in recent months sent groups of preachers on a special mission to Helmand, according to one commander in Musa Qala district, Mullah Aziz Mutmain. In addition to regular sermons on the sanctity of jihad, Taliban fighters have also been reminded to \"obey their superiors and particularly the newly appointed Amir ul-Momineen,\" he said.
Mullah Mansour's continuing efforts to consolidate power are also being seen by some Afghan officials as another bad sign for the government's efforts to bring the Taliban to peace talks.
The idea of immediate talks is keenly unpopular among many senior Taliban commanders, particularly given their recent success on the battlefield. Even with his recent success in gaining support, Mullah Mansour is unlikely to take a chance on talks anytime soon, Taliban officials said.
Still, the Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani, had declared that new progress on peace talks over the winter was a crucial step to try to head off another disastrous year of fighting against a resurgent Taliban. At the heart of Mr. Ghani's effort was a quadrilateral process, also involving Pakistan, the United States and China, that hinged on persuading the Pakistani military to pressure the Taliban to come to talks. Elements of the military have long sheltered the Taliban's senior leadership, and Mullah Mansour's links to Pakistani military intelligence were seen as instrumental in his rise to power, according to Afghan and Taliban officials.
After the March deadline for face-to-face talks was missed, Mr. Ghani's officials now say they doubt Pakistan took any practical steps.
James B. Cunningham, a former United States ambassador to Afghanistan who is now a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council, said it would be difficult to expect the Taliban at the table if they continue to have free movement in Pakistan.
\"One has to ask what is the best way to convince the Taliban to get into a serious negotiation, to begin to have a discussion about the resolution to the conflict -- that is going to be much more difficult to achieve if the Taliban continue to enjoy refuge in Pakistan.\"
Credit: MUJIB MASHAL and TAIMOOR SHAH; Mujib Mashal reported from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from K andahar, Afghanistan. Farooq Jan Mangal contributed reporting from Khost, Afghanistan.
Photograph
Mullah Mansour
Word count: 1177
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 6, 2016"
