"CAIRO -- Lawmakers in Libya's internationally recognized Parliament overwhelmingly rejected a proposed United Nations-backed unity cabinet on Monday, dealing a blow to diplomatic efforts to swiftly reconcile the country's splintered factions.
The Parliament, which meets in the eastern city of Tobruk, rejected the 32-member cabinet out of concern that it was too large, and that its members had been chosen not for their competency but to satisfy various regional factions, according to Abu Bakr Buera, an influential lawmaker.
Diplomats have been urging Libyan officials for more than a year to bridge the divisions that emerged in the years following the 2011 revolt against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, and that have left the nation battered by violence and split between competing governments in the east and west of the country.
The foreign pressure has also reflected growing concern about the rise of the Islamic State, which has capitalized on a vacuum of authority to seize territory and carry out deadly attacks, including a series of recent assaults on oil facilities.
The United States and several European countries have said they are preparing for possible military attacks against the Islamic State in Libya -- an action that would require the agreement and cooperation of a unified Libyan government.
The country is split between the government in Tobruk and a rival government based in Tripoli, the capital. In December, Libyan officials representing the country's different factions signed an agreement to form a government of national unity. Last week, as part of the agreement, a presidency council, formed under the United Nations agreement and based in Tunis, proposed the cabinet. Only the Tobruk-based Parliament was required to approve it.
The governing council now has 10 days to propose a government \"that should be smaller -- reduced to 10 or 12 portfolios,\" Mr. Buera said.
In a statement after the cabinet was rejected, the United Nations envoy to Libya, Martin Kobler, urged the Parliament and the presidency council \"to take the necessary decisions as soon as possible.\"
The Parliament had approved the unity agreement in principle, but it rejected an article that would allow the government to dismiss military leaders, Mr. Buera said. Most prominent among them is Gen. Khalifa Hifter, a divisive figure who has promised to purge Libya of Islamists and leads forces that are closely allied with the eastern government.
The race to consolidate the government comes as the Islamic State has intensified its attacks on Libyan oil facilities to the east of the extremist group's stronghold in the central city of Surt. Mustafa Sanalla, the head of Libya's state oil company, said in a statement on Sunday that the group had done \"a tremendous amount of damage to the oil industry in the last two weeks.\"
\"Their objective is to prevent the new government from stabilizing the economy, and unless they are stopped, they might succeed in their aims,\" Mr. Sanalla said.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Word count: 508
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 26, 2016"
