"Federal prosecutors in Minneapolis on Wednesday began laying out their case against three young Somali American men who allegedly plotted to join the Islamic State.
The trial of Abdirahman Yasin Daud, 22, Mohamed Abdihamid Farah, 22, and Guled Ali Omar, 21, has the potential of offering the most intimate glimpse into how the extremist group has managed to have success in attracting a least dozen young people from Minnesota's large Somali community to the fight in Syria and Iraq.
Six other Somali Americans from the Minneapolis-area who prosecutors connected to the three young men already have pleaded guilty to conspiring to travel to Syria to join the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS. A 10th Minneapolis-area man, Abdi Nur, is believed to be in Syria fighting with the Islamic State. Federal authorities said that Nur continued to recruit individuals from Minnesota.
What is unique about this case is the large number of individuals involved in the conspiracy, and how their deep personal connections may have played in the radicalization process. Some of those who have already pleaded guilty could be called to testify in the trial that is expected to take about three to four weeks.
The investigation into the Minneapolis conspiracy started in March 2014. Agents with the FBI relied on a confidential informant who gave them a window into the radicalization of a group of young men in Minneapolis' Somali-American community.
The three men on trial were arrested along with three other friends and associates on April 19, 2015, according to the criminal complaint.
Daud and Farah were arrested in San Diego, where prosecutors say the two, along with an FBI informant, traveled to buy fake passports for their travel to Syria. Omar and three other men, who have since plead guilty, were taken into custody in Minnesota.
Daud had communicated with members of ISIS, including Nur, ahead of his arrest, according to prosecutors.
Federal authorities also say they found messages between Daud and an unidentified ISIS member offering instruction on how to get to Syria and what type of SIM card he should buy for his cellphone he arrived in Turkey, the typical entry-point for foreign fighters trying to enter Syria.
In a secretly recorded conversation, Farah also told the informant he would kill FBI agents \"if our backs are against the wall,\" according to prosecutors.
Prosecutors alleged that Omar and Farah, along with three other Minneapolis men, had planned to travel to Syria earlier, but were thwarted by authorities who had been tipped about their plans from a confidential informant.
Farah along with three other men that prosecutors allege were part of the conspiracy took a Greyhound bus to New York in November with the intention of flying overseas and winding their way to Syria. Farah and two of the men were stopped at customs, while a fourth was taken off a flight bound for Istanbul, according to prosecutors.
After the men were thwarted in November 2014, prosecutors say they discussed among themselves about the need to show patience.
Prosecutors say Omar told his friends to fool the FBI.
Prosecutors say Daud talked to the group about the need to convince authorities that they were no longer a threat, urging his co-conspirators to \"fake it 'til you make it.\"
Credit: Aamer Madhani, and Kevin Johnson, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo AP
Word count: 590
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
