"Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Jeffrey Gettleman, The Times's East Africa bureau chief, shares what it was like for him to travel back with Benjamin Netanyahu -- in mind and body -- to Entebbe, Uganda, where the Israeli prime minister's older brother was killed in 1976 leading a raid that rescued 100 hostages being held by terrorists.
\"URGENT,\" the subject line read. \"The Prime Minister is ready to meet you. Which day would be appropriate for you?\"
The prime minister is ready? For me?
This wasn't the prime minister of one of the dozen countries I cover in East Africa. This was the prime minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu. Of course, I had seen him hundreds of times on television. But now, after a fluke involving a friend of a friend of a friend in Nairobi who had broached the idea of my writing about the prime minister's coming trip to Africa, miraculously, or terrifyingly, the interview was on.
The story was this: Mr. Netanyahu was going to Uganda to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the Entebbe rescue raid in which Israeli commandos stormed an airport and, within 90 minutes, saved more than 100 hostages being held by terrorists. Mr. Netanyahu's older brother, Yoni, was the commandos' leader -- and the only Israeli soldier killed in the raid. He was 30.
As I dug deeper into the research, I realized with a twinge of soberness -- and anxiety -- that in my hands was one of the most precious stories Israel has to tell, and that I had better not screw up.
Yoni is an icon. He was the ideal Israeli. It wasn't simply that he was handsome, intelligent, adventurous and patriotic; he seemed to embody a sense of sacrifice, of serving a cause greater than his own -- one he deeply believed in, though it wasn't easy on him. He left behind hundreds of letters that were posthumously published, illuminating a man who was half warrior, half poet and who constantly struggled to reconcile the two.
\"When you are wounded, and alone, in the midst of a scorched field, surrounded by smoke -- mushrooms of smoke from exploding shells, with your arm shattered and burning with a terrible pain,\" he wrote to his parents, \"then life becomes more precious and craved-for than ever. You want to embrace it and go on with it, to escape from all the blood and death, to live, live, even without hands and feet, but breathing, thinking, feeling, seeing.\"
He toggled back and forth between war and college, getting wounded, going to Harvard, getting married, getting divorced -- all by age 26. His life was a window into such a different time, when Israel was new and its existence incredibly fragile. I found it hard to read about Yoni without thinking that the things I had done at his age -- going to grad school, painting houses, backpacking around the world -- were small and inconsequential. By age 30, Yoni had been promoted to commander of one of the most elite, secretive and deadly commando units anywhere in the world: the Sayeret Matkal of the Israeli Army, known simply as \"The Unit.\"
[Video: Follow Me: The Yoni Netanyahu Story Official Trailer #1 (2012) HD Movie Watch on YouTube.]
\"I've learned since how to kill at close range, too -- to the point of pressing the muzzle against the flesh,\" Yoni wrote toward the end of his life. \"It adds a whole dimension of sadness to a man's being. Not a momentary, transient sadness, but something that sinks in and is forgotten, yet is there and endures.\"
Who writes like this? His openness and self-awareness stunned me.
I spent at least two hours on the phone with the third Netanyahu brother, Iddo -- the youngest; a writer and radiologist -- trying to delicately extract truth from myth, the real man from the icon. Iddo's voice was deep and rich. He was incredibly patient, almost amused by my obsession with detail. We reporters live in mortal fear of corrections, and if anyone knew the facts, Iddo did.
\"Why wasn't Yoni wearing a flak jacket when he was shot?\" I asked.
\"When exactly was he pronounced dead?\"
\"How many people had he killed on the battlefield?\"
\"And what about Harvard? Any recollection of which classes he took?\"
So when I showed up for my meeting with the prime minister, I was prepared.
His people had insisted he could not make time for an interview while on the ground in Uganda, so I had to fly to Jerusalem. That meant my colleague from the Jerusalem bureau, Isabel Kershner, who has been covering Mr. Netanyahu for years, could sit in, which helped in terms of understanding the broader context of the raid.
We climbed the steps of a blocklike office building on a sunny hillside in Jerusalem. The prime minister's office suite was about the size of my high school principal's and not much fancier. Mr. Netanyahu, several aides, a photographer, a lean security guard, Isabel and I all crammed into a small room adjacent to Mr. Netanyahu's primary office. I eased myself down into a scabby chair with some of its leather rubbed off.
I tried to pose questions that would draw out emotion, such as: If Yoni could come back from the past, and you could sit with him for a couple of hours, what would you talk about? I also asked Mr. Netanyahu if he had exploited the Yoni myth for political gain, as some Israelis contend.
We spoke for more than a half-hour, and Mr. Netanyahu answered every question slowly, picking each word carefully, as if he were giving dictation. Often, he looked around at other people in the room, and I never felt like I'd really connected with him. He focused back on me when talking about imaginary conversations he'd had with his older brother, who, at 21, wrote to Mr. Netanyahu: \"I miss you terribly. Even when I was in Israel, I didn't miss anyone at home as much as I missed you. I think the reason may be that you're the only true friend I ever had.\"
When it came time to fly from Tel Aviv to Entebbe, I was struck again by the shabby surroundings. The prime minister does not have his own plane; he basically borrows a jet from El Al, Israel's national airline. For this trip, it was an older one. The bathroom sinks were scratched-up stainless steel; the carpet was worn and nubby. This was no Air Force One.
The Entebbe visit came off without a hitch, despite a bizarre speech from Uganda's president, Yoweri Museveni, in which he kept referring to Israel as \"Palestine.\" I was sitting behind Mr. Netanyahu, so I couldn't see how that went over with him. Afterward, he laid a wreath a few feet from where his brother had been shot in the chest.
As I was putting together the story, I realized how profound the Entebbe legend had become. In those 90 minutes, Israel entrenched the image of itself, at least in some quarters, as a mythic land full of scholar-warriors who could overcome awesome odds and accomplish good.
Maybe Entebbe made Israel feel invincible. When I considered what the Israelis had to work with at the time, I could see why. The intelligence had been spotty. Israeli military planes could barely fly that far. The whole thing had been thrown together fast, on a shoestring budget.
Still, Yoni and his team had pulled it off.
Several of Israel's most important leaders since were connected to that raid: Mr. Netanyahu, of course, but also Shimon Peres (a future prime minister and president, he was the defense minister at the time); Yitzhak Rabin (nearly two decades before his assassination, he was the prime minister who gave final approval for the Entebbe raid, and he had awarded Yoni a medal in cadet school years before); and Ehud Barak (an important military planner who went on to be prime minister and, later, Mr. Netanyahu's minister of defense).
But one of the most important conversations I had for this story was not with a Netanyahu or a statesman. It was with Sara Guter Davidson, an 81-year-old Israeli who had been a hostage at Entebbe. She said she had been shocked when, among all the gunfire and explosions outside in the African night, she had heard people speaking Hebrew.
Every year, she visits Yoni's grave.
\"Many soldiers have died in Israel, but it is a different feeling with Yoni,\" she told me.
She paused and added, \"He died for us.\"
Photograph
Jeffrey Gettleman, the New York Times's East Africa Bureau Chief, Right, Interviewing Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel About His Older Brother, Yoni, Left, Who Was Killed While Leading the Israeli Commando Raid at Entebbe Airport in 1976. (Photographs by Uriel Sinai for the New York Times; Bettmann, Via Getty Images)
Word count: 1521
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 13, 2016"
