"MANILA -- At least 18 soldiers were killed and more than 50 wounded in a gun battle in the southern Philippines between government forces and the militant group Abu Sayyaf, military officials said Sunday.
Among the militants, the dead included a Moroccan bomb maker and the son of a rebel leader, the military said. It also said more than 20 rebels were believed to have been wounded, but offered no additional details.
The firefight took place on Saturday on the southwestern island of Basilan and lasted 10 hours, the military said. The day before, Abu Sayyaf had released Rolando del Torchio, a former Italian missionary turned restaurateur who was kidnapped from his pizzeria in the southern Philippine city of Dipolog in October.
At least 20 other foreign citizens are still being held by the group.
The military did not make a connection on Sunday between the release of Mr. del Torchio and the gun battle, other than that both involved factions of Abu Sayyaf.
A group of soldiers hunting for members of Abu Sayyaf near the small town of Tipo-Tipo was attacked at 8 a.m. on Saturday, said Capt. Filemon Tan, a spokesman for the military. Among the soldiers wounded in the ensuing fighting, he said, six were in critical condition.
Captain Tan said that among the dead was a Moroccan, Mohammad Khattab, whom he described as a \"bomb instructor and Islamic jihadist preacher who was trying to organize and unite local lawless armed groups to link with international terrorist groups, as well as spread radicalism and extremism.\"
Abu Sayyaf and other rebel groups in the southern Philippines have released videos on YouTube proclaiming their allegiance to the Islamic State, but the Philippine military has said that the militants are simply admirers of the international terrorist group and that there is no indication they are receiving financing, expertise or other support from it.
On Sunday, the Philippine defense secretary, Voltaire Gazmin, and the chief of staff of the military, Gen. Hernando Iriberri, flew to Zamboanga City, near Basilan Island, to assess the situation and visit the wounded, Captain Tan said. Neither official addressed whether the slain Moroccan was believed to have had links to the Islamic State.
On April 1, Abu Sayyaf abducted four Malaysian sailors in the southern Philippines, less than a week after kidnapping 10 Indonesians from a cargo ship in the same area. In September, it kidnapped two Canadians, a Norwegian and a Filipino from a resort in the southern Philippines. A Dutch bird-watcher and a Japanese treasure hunter are also being held by the group.
Ransom demands have been made for all of those being held, according to the military. It is unclear if any money was paid for Mr. del Torchio's release, but security analysts say that ransom is usually the only path to freedom for hostages held by Abu Sayyaf, short of a successful rescue mission.
The Philippines signed a preliminary peace deal in 2012 with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the largest Muslim separatist group in the Philippines, but the deal did not include Abu Sayyaf.
Word count: 524
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 11, 2016"
