"Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif vowed in a televised address Monday to hunt down and defeat militants who carry out attacks like the Easter bombing that targeted Christians and killed 72 people.
\"We will not allow them to play with the lives of the people of Pakistan,\" an emotional Sharif said. \"This is our resolve. This is the resolve of the 200 million people of Pakistan.
\"Terrorists should know that failure is their fate,\" said Sharif, who canceled a visit to the USA this week to attend a nuclear summit. He said the government would redouble its efforts to crack down on extremists who increasingly attack \"soft targets\" such as parks and schools.
A Taliban splinter group, Jamaat-ul-Ahrar, claimed it carried out the suicide bombing against Christians celebrating Easter in a park. Most of those killed were Muslims, many of them women and children, who also were in Gulshan-e-Iqbal park. About 300 people were wounded.
Parts of Pakistan began three days of mourning Monday, and many schools and markets were closed as families began burying the dead.
\"My son had gone to the park to spend his Easter holiday with his best friends. Who could have known that he wouldn't ever return?\" said Parveez Masih, whose 16-year-old son, Waqar, was killed in Sunday's bombing. The teen had wanted to show off his new clothes and shoes and hang out with his buddies, his father said.
Ruksana Bhatti said her 13-year-old son, Arun, was injured in the blast. \"A bomb exploding doesn't see the religion of the people it hits, and Muslims dying next to Christians is an example of that,\" she said. \"Mosques, churches, temples -- nothing means anything to these terrorists. We all are equal as targets for them.\"
Some residents said the target for the attack was particularly brutal because free parks and other public spaces such as the zoo in Lahore are magnets for the poor during holidays such as Eid, Easter and Christmas, as well as on Sundays.
\"There was a lot of rush in the park and especially because of Easter -- the local Christian community came to celebrate,\" said Dawood Ali, 24, who suffered fractures to his leg and was hospitalized. \"My cousin was injured in the blast, but his other two Christian friends died on the spot.
\"It was a distressing sight to see parents look for their kids in the dark after the blast,\" he said. \"Everyone was looking for their family members with no help.\"
Some said the Christian community has long been under threat and complained the government has not done enough to protect it. \"I blame the government for not taking the security risk on Easter seriously,\" said Samuel Benjamin, a Christian rights activist in Lahore. \"The group who attacked and claimed responsibility said it was an attack on Christians.\"
Pakistan has struggled with extremism for years, despite a crackdown after the Taliban attacked a school in December 2014, killing 134 students in the northwestern city of Peshawar.
\"Pakistan has not addressed the extremist mindset, nor has it cracked down on all terrorist groups,\" said Husain Haqqani, Pakistan's former ambassador to the United States and a senior fellow at the Hudson Institute, a Washington think-tank. \"Its policy of selective crackdown accompanied by tolerating some and even supporting other terrorist groups is only making things difficult. In Lahore, the terrorists made it clear that they won't give up.\"
Credit: Naila Inayat, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo ARIF ALI, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 612
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
