"CAIRO -- Jordan's government on Tuesday barred the country's news media from publishing reports on a shooting at an intelligence office near Amman that killed five people and raised fears that militants had been able to penetrate one of the region's most powerful and ruthlessly effective counterterrorism agencies.
Jordanian officials cast the shooting, which occurred on Monday, as an \"isolated and individual act,\" and said they had arrested the killer. There were no immediate claims of responsibility from militant groups like the Islamic State that might suggest the attack, which killed three intelligence officers and two other employees at the office, had had broader organizational support.
Local news reports said the suspect might have been detained at the intelligence building sometime before the shooting -- suggesting revenge as a possible motive.
The secrecy order, which prevented the publication of any news on the assault, including on social media, showed that the attack had struck a nerve in Jordan -- momentarily denting official boasts of successes in thwarting militant attacks and, more generally, in protecting the country from the kind of violence seen in nearby Syria and Iraq.
Despite the relative quiet, analysts say Jordan, which the United States considers one of its closest regional allies in combating terrorism, is increasingly vulnerable to attacks from domestic extremists and foreign groups because of its high-profile role in the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State. Jordan has also given refuge to hundreds of thousands of Syrians who have fled their nation's civil war, raising tensions in Jordan by further straining its fragile economy.
\"For Jordan, it is a big shock,\" said Oraib al-Rantawi, the director of the Al Quds Center for Political Studies in Amman, the capital, speaking of the shooting on Monday. \"We are proud to have maintained our security and stability in this region for the past five years.\"
But the country faces growing danger from what Mr. Rantawi called a \"jihadist crescent\" in Syria, western Iraq and the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt, he said. The government has failed to fully root out growing extremism at home, despite its crackdown on suspected jihadists, he added, and Jordan faces a looming threat from hundreds of Jordanians who have joined militant groups abroad
\"How will we deal with them, reintegrate them? This is a major challenge,\" Mr. Rantawi said.
The government's confidence has been shaken by attacks and foiled plots in the last year, like the fatal shooting in November of five people, including two American trainers, by a Jordanian soldier at a police training center. In March, officials said they had foiled a major Islamic State plot to strike civilian and military targets.
The intelligence office that was attacked on Monday, belonging to the country's General Intelligence Directorate, was a particularly rich symbolic target for militants, Mr. Rantawi said. \"When it comes to Jordanian jihadists, or militants on the regional level, many consider the G.I.D. a harsh enemy with long arms,\" he added.
The authorities did not release the name of the suspect or any details on his background. A video said to show his capture in a mosque showed a man surrounded by people, with his hands bound behind his back, and a child removing bullets from his pocket.
Unconfirmed reports in Jordanian newspapers published before the secrecy order was issued said the suspect was 22. The reports said he had been detained about two weeks ago by the intelligence agency, which has been criticized in the past by human rights groups for carrying out secret detentions and torture. A government spokesman refused to answer questions about the case, saying the investigation into the shooting was classified.
Faced with a vexing and escalating threat, Jordan's government has increasingly responded by preventing the news media from reporting on militant plots -- following an example set by other authoritarian governments in the region, including Egypt and Turkey, which have turned to secrecy orders to prevent reporting on anything deemed sensitive or embarrassing to the government.
Jordan has issued several secrecy orders in the last year, and has prosecuted at least one journalist who violated the orders, human rights advocates say.
The decision to bar reporting on the shooting was aimed at \"maintaining the confidentiality of investigations,\" a government statement said.
AuthorAffiliation
KAREEM FAHIM Follow Kareem Fahim on Twitter @kfahim.
Word count: 737
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 8, 2016"
