"Word that the Iraqi army was on the outskirts of Mosul gave hope to traumatized refugees still covered in dust after fleeing from the battle against Islamic State militants.
\"We are proud of the Iraqi army because they saved us,\" said Abu Ali, 52, from Bazwaya, a town about 10 miles east of central Mosul that government troops retook this week from the Islamic State. \"We are not afraid of them (government troops). We are afraid of the Islamic State.\"
Ali is among the 1,400 people -- mostly Arab Sunni Muslims and members of the Shabaak sect of Islam -- who arrived the past few days in a camp in Khazar, 25miles north of Mosul. A week ago, the camp was still under construction. It's now prepared to hold 30,000 people.
The final days in Bazwaya were tense and chaotic, Ali said. The Islamic State had forbidden a host of activities under the radical group's ultra-orthodox interpretation of religion -- even more so than earlier, he noted. And as Iraqi government forces approached, the Islamic State turned the town into a shooting gallery.
\"There were much more controls,\" Ali said. \"We couldn't go out, and if you went out, there were snipers everywhere. You could risk death even crossing the road to go to your uncle's house.\"
He had one request for Iraqi soldiers as they occupy Bazwaya, before heading from the eastern suburb to retake Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city: \"I want to ask the government to protect our houses.\"
On Tuesday, Iraqi special forces entered the eastern outskirts of Mosul, the first time government troops have set foot in the nation's second-largest city in more than two years, the Associated Press reported. The advance was the start of a difficult operation that could take weeks, if not months, to oust the Islamic State militants.
Refugees at the Khazar camp like Amina Amira, 35, said she was thankful to have escaped the clutches of the Islamic State. But she and many others also said they are scared about what might happen as the Iraqi army takes the fight into Mosul.
Islamic State militants are reportedly using residents as human shields, setting land mines and improvised explosive devices on the streets of Mosul.
The militants are also preparing to ignite oil trenches to stymie Iraqi forces advancing with the help of airstrikes by the U.S.-led coalition, according to aid groups, the Iraqi military and the United Nations.
\"I'm afraid,\" Amira said. \"We still have our relatives under (Islamic State) control.\"
The camp gave Anie Haswak, 19, a respite from the Islamic State's reign of terror. She moved from Mosul to Bazwaya a month ago, after her wedding.
Since both towns were under the control of the militants, she could move freely, she said. But she and her husband had been growing despondent about their future after they have children. She saw how her nieces, nephews and younger cousins were growing up under the Islamic State.
\"We didn't prepare our kids to go to school or the youth to go to university,\" she said. \"It's a generation lost.\"
In Mosul, residents said they are now feeling the same pressures and are trying to get out.
\"I am very concerned,\" said Abu Heba, a Mosul resident reached by phone. \"I am afraid my family will get hurt.\"
Islamic State fighters have erected roadblocks using concrete barriers to keep residents from leaving the city.
Al Shamary reported from Baghdad.
Credit: Arianna Pagani and Ammar Al Shamary, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Safin Hamed, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 629
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
