"MANILA -- Fifteen Philippine soldiers have been killed this week and 12 others wounded in mounting clashes with the militant group Abu Sayyaf, the military said on Tuesday, as the government announced plans to deploy thousands more soldiers to the group's stronghold in the south.
It said a \"series of clashes\" had begun on Monday, as the troops scoured jungle terrain on the southern island of Jolo in search of rebel fighters and at least 23 hostages, including a Dutch bird-watcher kidnapped in 2012 and a Norwegian abducted last year from a beach resort he helped manage.
A spokesman for President Rodrigo Duterte said on Tuesday that the deaths had only strengthened the government's resolve to crush Abu Sayyaf, which was founded in the early 1990s to fight for an independent Islamic state in the southern Philippines but which in more recent years has degenerated into a kidnap-for-ransom gang known to behead captives.
\"The president is focused that the threat of the Abu Sayyaf is terminated as soon as possible,\" said the spokesman, Ernesto Abella, adding that Mr. Duterte was closely monitoring developments. He said the president had approved the deployment of about 2,500 more soldiers, or five battalions, to Jolo to augment the forces there.
A report by the military's Joint Task Force Sulu said heavy fighting broke out early Monday afternoon when army troops chanced upon 30 heavily armed Abu Sayyaf fighters on the outskirts of the remote town of Patikul on Jolo, which is part of Sulu Province. A half-hour gun battle left two gunmen dead, the report said.
Later that day, a separate scout ranger battalion encountered about 80 Abu Sayyaf fighters and killed at least two, according to the report.
The gunmen apparently called in reinforcements, and a third clash erupted outside Patikul, where at least 120 gunmen engaged troops in heavy fighting, the military said.
\"Fifteen soldiers, including a second lieutenant, were killed in action, while 10 others were wounded,\" the military said. Two others were wounded in the earlier clash.
It said the extent of Abu Sayyaf casualties was unclear.
Skirmishes continued sporadically on Tuesday, the military said.
\"There may still be casualties along the way as we advance this solemn duty to eradicate these bandits and terrorists of 25 years, but we will not stop until we rid our country of the menace this Abu Sayyaf group brings to the world,\" said the armed forces chief, Gen. Ricardo Visaya.
\"Keep the pressure on the enemy until they wear out,\" the general said. \"Just ensure that they won't be able to leave the island, and we will be triumphant in the end.\"
Abu Sayyaf, or Bearers of the Sword, is believed to number fewer than 500 fighters at present. But it has managed to elude successive Philippine governments by arming and recruiting young men mostly from impoverished, far-flung villages on Jolo.
Its ranks deteriorated into banditry not long after its founder, Abdurajak Abubakar Janjalani, was killed in 1998.
The military has blamed it for some of the worst terrorist attacks in the Philippines, including a ferry bombing that killed at least 100 people in 2004.
This year, the militants beheaded two Canadians and a Filipino it had seized separately. Two Indonesians, however, escaped captivity amid speculation that their families had paid ransoms.
The group is still holding eight Indonesians, eight Filipinos and five Malaysians, as well as the Dutch bird-watcher and the Norwegian. All are believed to be held by the bandits in Jolo jungles, though it was not clear whether they were in the area when the clashes occurred.
An armed forces spokesman, Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla, said the military was in control of the situation and \"would not let this escalate.\"
\"We are continuing to go after the forces of the Abu Sayyaf group,\" he said. \"There will be a realignment of forces to intensify our operations. The president has not given a specific deadline, but he has given instructions to stop this problem once and for all.\"
\"The directive is as soon as possible,\" he said.
Word count: 687
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 31, 2016"
