"It was cold enough to snow this week in the nearby Hebron Hills, but Muataz Shalaldeh, whose family sells high-quality Israeli firewood to heat Palestinians' stone homes, said business has plummeted 90% since a wave of Palestinian attacks on Israelis began four months ago.
That's because his business has been disrupted by Israel's crackdown in the West Bank to thwart Palestinian terror attacks. Israel has deployed more troops and established more checkpoints and road closures.
Shalaldeh is among the many law-abiding Palestinians paying an economic price for the more than 100 attacks carried out by other Palestinians that prompted the stern response from Israel.
The cost also goes beyond economics because people can't visit relatives and have long wait times at roadblocks.
The Israeli government says the tighter security is necessary to prevent additional attacks, which have claimed the lives of 26 Israelis and an American student as of Thursday.
At least 149 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli fire, 104 of them identified by Israel as attackers, the Associated Press reported.
Shalaldeh sees the tighter security as collective punishment for all Palestinians.
\"Winter is our high season, but we haven't been able to receive raw materials,\" Shalaldeh said, gazing at the rapidly dwindling supply of logs he and his brothers turn into firewood in their small log-cutting factory in this village 5 miles northeast of Hebron.
Although Israeli suppliers are willing to deliver the wood to one of the checkpoints that separate Israeli and Palestinian territory, \"Palestinian truck drivers won't drive to the checkpoints,\" he said. \"They're afraid of being interrogated or even shot by Israeli soldiers.\"
Even if his factory was able to procure the wood -- preferred over Palestinian wood because it is free of scorpions -- Israeli troops \"have basically closed all the entrances to Hebron,\" the largest West Bank city and the firewood factory's biggest market, Shalaldeh said.
Israel's security crackdown \"has had a dramatic impact\" on the Palestinian economy, said Jawad Sayyed Al-Herbawi, CEO of the Hebron Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
\"There has been an effect on imports, exports, on the commerce between different regions and cities in the West Bank and even Gaza,\" Al-Herbawi said, noting that 40% of the Palestinian GDP is generated in the Hebron region in the southern West Bank. Last October and November, the Palestinian economy lost $1.25 billion, and the public's purchasing power in the Hebron region alone dropped 35%, according to the Chamber of Commerce.
About 58,000 Palestinians have government permits to work in Israel. Al-Herbawi said about 35% of the legal workers in and around Hebron are now unemployed because their Israeli employees fired them over security concerns or workers fear interacting with soldiers at checkpoints.
In addition, some Jewish settlements in the West Bank decided to no longer employ the 27,000 Palestinian laborers who have permits to work there after a Palestinian stabbed to death a mother of six in her home near Hebron on Jan. 17.
Israel Defense Forces spokesman Peter Lerner said the military is doing what it can to minimize disruptions to Palestinian life, but he says security comes first. \"The principle is to enable people not involved in violence to go about their everyday tasks, but that's not possible when an area is being used as a launching pad for terrorism,\" Lerner said. \"We've exposed an explosives laboratory, attempts to carry about abductions, sniper attacks and suicide bombings.\"
Shalaldeh's sister-in-law, Wasmaeel, 35, said she fears going through the checkpoints, so now she visits her mother in a nearby village once a month, not weekly as she used to do. Her husband lost his job as a cook in Israel, and the family's finances are becoming dire, she said.
Selling oversized cauliflowers and fresh eggs on the side of a road near Hebron, Allah Barbarwi, 60, said the latest violence has cost him a 70% drop in sales. \"I have 10 children and I'm supporting four of the ones studying in university, so this is a problem,\" he said. \"Before, I used to have a lot of Israeli customers, but now few stop and buy from me.\"
Barbarwi said he no longer likes to sell his produce next to the road, where Israeli or Palestinian violence could erupt at any time. \"I feel I'm in danger,\" he said.
Credit: Michele Chabin, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Michele Chabin for USA TODAY
Word count: 768
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
