"The airstrike on Oct. 16 was touted as a battlefield success against a key figure loyal to the Islamic State group. American defense officials announced that a recruiter for the militants, Denis Cuspert, a German-born former rapper known as Deso Dogg, had been killed in Syria that day.
But on Wednesday, the Pentagon announced that it was mistaken: Mr. Cuspert had survived the strike near the town of Raqqa.
Maj. Adrian Rankine-Galloway, a Pentagon spokesman, said in an emailed statement: \"At the time, our assessment was the strike was successful. It now appears that assessment was incorrect and Denis Cuspert survived the airstrike.\"
The major gave no further details, such as when Pentagon officials learned that Mr. Cuspert was still alive. Major Rankine-Galloway said the United States would continue to target terrorists like Mr. Cuspert who work to \"plot, conduct or inspire attacks against the West and our allies.\"
The Pentagon's reversal appeared to put to rest months of speculation online and by Germany intelligence services about the fate of the man the State Department had designated a \"global terrorist.\"
The statement from Washington came after a profile of Mr. Cuspert in The Fader last month. The article said that in the months after the Pentagon announced that Mr. Cuspert had died, online reports, including from German-speaking supporters of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, continued to claim that Mr. Cuspert was still alive.
German officials also had never confirmed his death, despite the official statement from Washington. In June, the Berlin branch of Germany's domestic intelligence agency, the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution, reaffirmed its doubts that the former rapper had been killed.
It said Mr. Cuspert had been identified as the off-camera narrator of a three-minute video released online in April with the German title \"An Euch Feinde Allahs,\" or \"To You, Enemies of Allah.\" The video shows various war crimes committed by ISIS and appeals to people to go to Syria or Iraq to join the group, or to carry out attacks in their home countries.
\"Repeatedly circulated information about Cuspert's death, most recently in October, have not been confirmed,\" the intelligence office said in its annual security report for 2015.
Mr. Cuspert was born in Berlin to a German mother and a Ghanaian father who soon left the family. His American stepfather, a former soldier, was a strict disciplinarian, and amid conflicts at home, Mr. Cuspert spent five years in a facility for troubled children.
As Deso Dogg, Mr. Cuspert toured with the American rapper DMX in 2006, but he abandoned rap music in 2010. He converted to Islam and gained notoriety as a singer of nasheeds, or Islamic devotional music, in German. Mr. Cuspert traveled to Egypt and eventually made his way to Syria.
In February 2015, the State Department designated Mr. Cuspert a global terrorist and a member of the Islamic State group, saying that he was a \"willing pitchman\" for the militants' atrocities. It said he had appeared in videos on the group's behalf, including one in which he appeared to be holding the severed head of a man he claimed had been executed for opposing the group.
The State Department said that using his adopted Arabic name, Abu Talha al-Almani, the former rapper swore allegiance to the group's leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, and had tried to recruit other Germans.
On Oct. 30, 2015, the Defense Department said Mr. Cuspert had been killed in the airstrike.
\"Cuspert was a foreign terrorist fighter and operative for ISIL who used social media to take advantage of disaffected youth and potential Western recruits,\" Elissa Smith, a Defense Department spokeswoman, said in the statement.
He had \"threatened the president of the United States and German citizens\" and had encouraged other Western Muslims to carry out attacks on behalf of the Islamic State, she added.
In a New York Times article in 2011, Mr. Cuspert was quoted as saying that young people were drawn to elements of his personal story, including his membership in Berlin street gangs and the notion that he finally found the \"right way.\"
\"My duty is to use my voice for telling people the truth, and the truth is, jihad is a duty,\" he said.
Credit: CHRISTINE HAUSER; Helene Cooper contributed reporting from Washington, and Melissa Eddy from Berlin.
Word count: 732
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 4, 2016"
