"The word ricocheted around the world at internet speed Thursday morning: Joint Base Andrews, best known as home to Air Force One, was on lockdown because of reports of an active shooter. Security forces scrambled, cable news zeroed in, a flight by the vice president was put off, and Twitter users repeated thirdhand reports of a gunman holed up in a bathroom.
It turned out to be a misunderstanding; there was no gunman. But for more than an hour, one of the most prominent military installations in the world, in the Maryland suburbs a few miles outside the nation's capital, was paralyzed by a false alarm.
The episode came on a day when Andrews had planned to hold a drill on how to respond to an active shooter -- a coincidence that showed how primed institutions around the country are to react to terrorism.
\" 'See something, say something' produces useful information in a flood of irrelevant information,\" said Anthony C. Roman, who heads Roman & Associates, a security and investigations consulting firm.
\"A false alarm is part of the inherent downside,\" but it is a price worth paying, he said.
The episode at Andrews began about 9 a.m. with a report of a gunman in or near the Malcolm Grow Medical Clinic, near the western edge of the base. Base security personnel and the Prince George's County police responded, the base was placed on lockdown, and people there were instructed to shelter in place. There were no reports of shots fired, either from base officials or from people at Andrews who posted to social media about the alert and lockdown.
Then Andrews released a statement that the base had planned to hold a security drill on Thursday, simulating an active shooter emergency, leading to speculation that someone had mistaken the exercise for the real thing. Later, base officials discounted that idea, saying that the drill was to take place later, on the other side of the base, and in any case never got underway.
Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. was scheduled to fly out of Andrews in the morning for a trip to Ohio, but he stayed at his residence at the Naval Observatory in Washington until officials at Andrews gave the all-clear signal, said Meghan Dubyak, a spokeswoman for the vice president.
About 10:30 a.m., the base gave the all-clear signal, and the lockdown was lifted. Mr. Biden's flight later left.
\"We take all threats seriously and reacted to ensure the security of those on the base,\" Col. Brad Hoagland, the base commander, said in a statement.
As for the initial, erroneous report of a gunman, a statement released by Andrews indicated that it was a case of mistaken identity.
\"There was a misidentification of the security forces emergency services team who were conducting a routine inspection of the medical facility, which caused the distress call to the base defense operations center,\" it said.
Credit: RICHARD PEREZ-PENA; Matthew Rosenberg and Gardiner Harris contributed reporting from Washington.
Photograph
Police, Military and Other Personnel at a Gate to Joint Base Andrews. A Misunderstanding Had Led to a Report of an Active Shooter. (Photograph by Michael Reynolds/European Pressphoto Agency)
Word count: 549
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 1, 2016"
