"ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Civilian and military leaders in Pakistan accused India on Tuesday of sponsoring and orchestrating terrorism and separatist movements, presenting what they said was clear evidence: a video confession.
Pakistani officials say they arrested Kulbhushan Yadav, an officer in the Indian Navy, this month in Baluchistan, a mineral-rich province in southwestern Pakistan where an insurgency has simmered for years. Officials in Pakistan have accused India of fanning separatist sentiment there.
The information minister in Pakistan, Pervaiz Rasheed, and Lt. Gen. Asim Saleem Bajwa, the military spokesman, released a six-minute video of Mr. Yadav at a news conference in Islamabad, Pakistan, the capital. \"It is very rare that a country's intelligence officer is caught in another country,\" Lt. Gen. Bajwa told reporters. \"It is a big achievement.\"
The timing of the release of the video on Tuesday was notable. It came on the same day that a Pakistani team of investigators was visiting Pathankot in India, the site of a terrorist attack in January that India says was the work of gunmen from Pakistan.
Referring to the video, General Bajwa said, \"There can be no clearer evidence of Indian interference in Pakistan,\" and added that Mr. Yadav's activities were \"nothing short of state-sponsored terrorism.\"
In the video, Mr. Yadav appears relaxed as he acknowledges carrying out a long list of operations in Baluchistan and in Karachi, the major southern port. Mr. Yadav is heard to say that he is a naval officer, with six years to go before retirement, and that he was enlisted in 2013 to join RAW, the Indian intelligence agency. Since then, he said, he has been involved in a variety of activities meant to destabilize Pakistan.
India has denied that Mr. Yadav is an intelligence operative.
General Bajwa said Mr. Yadav told the Pakistanis to use a code phrase in communicating with the Indian authorities, to demonstrate to them who it was that they had captured. The phrase, the general said, was \"Your monkey is with us.\"
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Word count: 360
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 30, 2016"
