"The Pentagon ordered families of hundreds of U.S. military members to evacuate southern Turkey amid violence in the country and on the eve of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's arrival in the USA for security meetings.
The \"ordered departure\" Tuesday came two days before Erdogan is to meet with Vice President Biden during a nuclear security summit in Washington.
White House spokesman Josh Earnest said Erdogan and President Obama will meet informally.
The decision affects almost 700 family members and other U.S. civilians assigned to Incirlik Air Base, a consulate in Adana and smaller facilities in the cities of Izmir and Mugla.
Incirlik Air Base, home to the U.S. 39th Air Base Wing, is a crucial player in the war against the Islamic State.
Last year, Turkey agreed to allow use of the base for U.S.-coalition jets conducting airstrikes in Syria and Iraq. NATO's Allied Land Command is based in Izmir.
The mandatory evacuation does not include more than 100 family members based in Ankara and Istanbul despite recent bombings in both cities.
A car bomb in the capital, Ankara, killed at least 30 people on Feb. 17, and a suicide bombing on a popular shopping street in Istanbul killed five people, including two Americans, on March 19.
On March 9, the Defense Department-run school at Incirlik, less than 100 miles from the Syrian border, was closed because of security concerns, and the base imposed additional protective measures.
The total U.S. military force deployed at Incirlik has grown to nearly 2,500, from about 1,300 last year, after the Turkish government agreed to let U.S. combat aircraft use the base.
State Department spokesman John Kirby said Secretary of State John Kerry was involved in the decision and notified Turkish leaders Monday. \"This was a decision made out of an abundance of caution to keep people as safe as possible,\" Kirby said.
Michael Desch, co-director of the University of Notre Dame's International Security Program, said the decision to evacuate families is unsurprising given the region's perilous terror climate.
\"I think the final straw was Brussels,\" Desch said of the terror attacks in Belgium last week that killed more than 30 people. \"The risk-management people must have determined that Turkey was low-hanging fruit in terms of vulnerabilities.\"
Word count: 397
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
