"You could be forgiven, after five years of Syria's war dominating front pages, for feeling lost.
It is easy to track the war's toll: It has killed 500,000 people by some estimates, displaced millions, opened space for the Islamic State, and sucked in foreign powers, including the United States. It is harder to keep track of the how and why. The basics can seem even more confusing than the day-to-day details.
But those basics are crucial to understanding Syria's war -- and they are far more complex than they might initially seem. As last week's truce appears shaky after American planes bombed Syrian troops, here are straightforward answers to some of the fundamental questions about the conflict: an attempt to explain its origins, the broader context and how it relates to the refugee crisis and the rise of the Islamic State.
What is the Syrian civil war?
The war makes more sense if you think of it as four overlapping conflicts.
The core conflict is between forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad and the rebels who oppose him. Over time, both sides fractured into multiple militias, including local and foreign fighters, but their fundamental disagreement is over whether Mr. Assad's government should stay in power.
This opened a second conflict: Syria's ethnic Kurdish minority took up arms amid the chaos. The Kurds carved out a de facto ministate. While Mr. Assad has not focused on fighting the Kurdish groups, they are opposed by neighboring Turkey, which is in conflict with its own Kurdish minority.
The third conflict involves the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, which emerged out of infighting among jihadist groups. In 2014, the Islamic State seized large parts of Syria and Iraq. It has no allies and is at war with all other actors in the conflict.
The fourth, and most complex, dynamic may be the crisscrossing foreign interventions. Mr. Assad receives vital support from Iran and Russia, as well as the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah. The rebels are backed by the United States and oil-rich Arab states like Saudi Arabia.
How did the war happen?
On the surface, the conflict began in 2011 with the Arab Spring. Syrians, like other peoples across the region, rose up peacefully against their authoritarian government. Mr. Assad cracked down violently. Communities took up arms to defend themselves, then fought back in what became a civil war.
But that alone does not explain Syria's disintegration. It is now clear that the state was weak in ways that made it inherently unstable and prone to violence.
The government was dominated by a minority group. Over decades, Syria's religious and ethnic divides had taken on greater political importance, making the ruling minority fearful and reactive. Mr. Assad had strong support among the military and security services, but not the broader population, making violence more tempting.
Fighting, once it began, was worsened by several external factors. A decade of war in neighboring Iraq had produced battle-hardened extremist groups that now flowed into Syria. Iraq's political troubles in 2011 and 2012 helped open space for the Islamic State. During this time, Syria was sucked into the regional power struggle between Iran and Saudi Arabia.
Which countries are involved?
Five countries are playing a major role in Syria, each with a different agenda. Their interventions have locked the war into an ever-worsening stalemate.
Iran was first, sending supplies and soldiers to prop up Mr. Assad. Iran sees Syria as crucial to its regional strategy: It provides access to Lebanon and therefore Hezbollah, a group Tehran uses for regional influence and as a counterweight to Israel, whose nuclear weapons it fears.
Saudi Arabia supported Syria's rebels in the hopes of replacing Mr. Assad with a friendlier government and of countering Iran's influence. Saudi Arabia and Iran have been rivals for decades, fighting something like a cold war for regional dominance. (Other Arab states like Jordan, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates have also backed the rebels.)
The United States funnels weapons to Syria's rebels. It did so initially out of opposition to Mr. Assad, a longtime enemy, and later to encourage those groups to fight the Islamic State. The United States has also armed Kurdish groups against the Islamic State.
Turkey sheltered Syrian rebels and ushered in foreign recruits, seeking to undermine and perhaps topple Mr. Assad. Later, the country also acted to counter Syrian Kurdish groups, fearing that they could strengthen Kurdish insurgents in Turkey.
Russia has backed Mr. Assad from the beginning, selling him arms and providing diplomatic cover at the United Nations. Syria is one of Russia's last remaining allies, and it is where Moscow maintains its only military bases outside the former Soviet Union. Russian forces intervened in 2015, at a time when Mr. Assad appeared to be losing ground.
Why is the war so bloody?
There have been atrocities on all sides, but forces loyal to Mr. Assad have committed by far the most. That has included using chemical weapons, barrel bombs and starvation.
Because neither Mr. Assad nor the rebels are strong enough to win, the battle lines push back and forth, rolling across communities in waves of destruction that kill thousands but accomplish little else.
Foreign interventions have made those shifting front lines even bloodier and have deepened the stalemate. As a result, the overall violence kills more Syrians without altering the conflict's underlying dynamics.
As often happens in lengthy civil wars, militias have filled the vacuum. Their leaders often behave more as warlords, forcibly extracting resources from local communities.
The rise of the Islamic State has worsened all of these trends. The jihadist group has provided another set of shifting battle lines, introduced more warlords, compelled more foreign interventions and put communities under its tyrannical, fanatical rule.
Why is it divided by religion?
There is nothing innately religious about Syria's war, but its broader political forces have played out along religious lines. To understand why, it helps to start about 100 years ago.
After World War I, France took control of an Ottoman Empire territory that is now Syria. France ruled through minority groups that would be too small to hold power without outside support. That included Alawites, followers of a branch of Shiite Islam. The last French troops left in 1946, and Syria's military consolidated power in a 1970 coup led by Hafez al-Assad, an Alawite general and the father of Bashar al-Assad.
Syria's authoritarian government favored Alawites and other minorities, widening social and political divides along sectarian lines.
Minority governments like Syria's tend to be unstable. They sometimes fear discrimination or worse should they lose power, and can see the majority group as a potential threat rather than a base of support. This can make them more willing to use violence to hold on to power.
As the war has worsened, many Syrians have based their allegiance on sectarian identity. This contributes to atrocities: If Alawites are seen as innately pro-Assad, then Sunni militias could conclude that all Alawite civilians are a threat and treat them accordingly, which prompts more defensive sorting.
How did the Islamic State form?
A key name is Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, a Jordanian extremist who fought in Afghanistan in the 1990s and Iraq in the 2000s. He flourished in Iraq's war, using tactics now associated with the Islamic State: videotaped beheadings, mass killings of fellow Muslims deemed nonbelievers and attacks meant to incite a Sunni-Shiite war.
Al Qaeda invited Mr. Zarqawi to rebrand his group as Al Qaeda in Iraq, but the two factions argued over strategy and ideology, setting them up for conflict a decade later in Syria.
Mr. Zarqawi was killed in 2006, and his group declined as Sunni Iraqis turned against it.
Years later, amid political chaos in Iraq, the group reconstituted itself as the Islamic State in Iraq, now led by Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who combined Mr. Zarqawi's views with an apocalypticism taking hold amid the region's upheaval.
In 2013, Mr. Baghdadi declared himself commander of all Al Qaeda forces in Iraq and Syria. Mr. Baghdadi -- his force now rebranded as the Islamic State -- invaded Syria to fight his former Qaeda allies.
The Islamic State carved out a ministate in Syria's chaos, then used it as a base to invade Iraq in 2014.
Why is the refugee crisis so large?
The war in Syria has produced nearly five million refugees.
They face disease and malnutrition. Host countries often bar them from working, meaning that families cannot provide for themselves. Many Syrian children are deprived of education, a problem that could hinder them for life.
Many refugees, unable to tolerate life in crowded camps, have braved the dangerous journey to Europe. But European voters have largely rejected them, supporting extreme measures to keep out Syrians and other migrants.
As a result, many refugees are stuck in camps in Italy and Greece. Many others die trying to reach Europe. European countries, along with the United States and Canada, have absorbed thousands of refugees, but not nearly enough to alter the underlying crisis.
AuthorAffiliation
MAX FISHER Follow Max Fisher on Twitter @Max_Fisher .
Photograph
Musa, 25, a Kurdish Marksman, Looking Over the Town of Kobane, Syria, in January 2015. The United States has Armed Kurdish Groups Against the Islamic State. (Photograph by Bulent Kilic/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images); Syrian Kurdish Refugees in 2014 in Turkey, Which Is in Conflict with Its Own Kurdish Minority. (Photograph by Bryan Denton for the New York Times)
Word count: 1605
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 21, 2016"
