"A Canadian man who had proclaimed his support for the Islamic State was killed after setting off an explosion in the back of a taxi while being fired upon by police officers, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police said Thursday.
The man, Aaron Driver, 24, died on Wednesday afternoon in Strathroy, Ontario, a town of about 21,000 southwest of Toronto. Police officers and other security forces had surrounded the house where he was living after the F.B.I. forwarded to the Canadian authorities a \"martyrdom video\" made by Mr. Driver, Mike Cabana, the deputy commissioner of the R.C.M.P., said at a news conference in Ottawa.
It took Canadian officials about two and a half hours to identify Mr. Driver on Wednesday morning as the man in the video threatening to carry out an attack in an unspecified location in Canada within 72 hours. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police then had to locate him.
\"It was a race against time,\" Mr. Cabana said.
In the video, a man wearing a black balaclava tells Canadians that they \"still have a heavy debt that has to be paid, you still have Muslim blood on your hands.\" The man refers to images of death from the recent terrorist attacks in Paris and says that is what Canadians should expect.
\"We thirst for your blood,\" the man said.
Mr. Cabana said it was not clear where Mr. Driver intended to carry out his attack or the form it would take. A Canadian newspaper, The Globe and Mail, quoting the owner of the taxi company, said that Mr. Driver had said that he was traveling to a shopping mall in London, Ontario, a city about 40 minutes away.
Injuries sustained by the taxi driver were apparently minor, although photographs showed extensive damage to the back of the taxi.
The police said that Mr. Driver did not appear to have any accomplices. But he was well known to the police and security officials.
Born in Saskatchewan, Mr. Driver, who was most recently living at his sister's house in Strathroy, was under a peace bond, which imposed limits on his activities and required him to report to the police twice a month. He was arrested last year when he was living in Winnipeg, Manitoba, after his social media posts came to the attention of the police and intelligence agencies.
Several Canadian news outlets reported that Mr. Driver had converted to Islam in 2008 and held radical views.
In an interview with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation last year, Mr. Driver said that Canadians should not have been surprised by the attack on Canada's Parliament and war memorial in October 2014 by another radicalized convert to Islam.
\"They had it coming for them; they deserved it,\" he told the broadcaster.
A large force of tactical officers, snipers and explosives experts arrived in Strathroy on Wednesday not long before the taxi appeared at the house to pick up Mr. Driver.
Assistant Commissioner Jennifer Strachan of the R.C.M.P. said that officers were not certain who was in the house, nor did they know that a cab was coming.
She said that it was not clear what materials were responsible for the explosion in the back seat of the cab or if the explosion was the cause of Mr. Driver's death. Assistant Commissioner Strachan said it was also not clear whether the explosives were on Mr. Driver's body or in a backpack he was carrying at the time police officers were firing on him.
Word count: 590
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 12, 2016"
