"The brutal, month-long struggle for the Iraqi city of Fallujah is over, and Islamic State militants have been driven from the once-booming, now beleaguered \"city of mosques,\" Iraqi military leaders said Sunday.
Lt. Gen. Abdul-Wahab al-Saadi told Iraqi state TV that government troops had swept into the northwestern neighborhood of al-Julan, the last area of Fallujah to remain under militant control. The battle for Fallujah has featured sometimes fierce door-to-door battles as the military worked to keep civilian casualties to a minimum.
\"We convey the good news to the Iraqi people that the battle of Fallujah is over,\" al-Saadi said, adding that more than 1,800 militants died in the fighting and the rest had fled the city.
The Iraqi military was supported by coalition airstrikes and local militias.
Iraqi Defense Minister Khalid al-Obeidi stressed the value of the airstrikes and urged continued support in the fight against the Islamic State, also known as Daesh.
\"About 90% #Fallujah is safe & habitable b/c we caught Daesh off guard, preventing them from destroying city as they did w/ Ramadi & Sinjar,\" al-Obeidi tweeted.
Fallujah, a predominantly Sunni city about 40 miles west of Baghdad in Anbar Province, is known for the scores of mosques that dot its neighborhoods.
The city has been under the control of the Islamic State since 2014, when it became one of the first Iraqi cities to fall to the militants.
The government offensive in Fallujah followed a successful operation in December to wrest Ramadi, another Sunni city in western Iraq, from militant control. But Ramadi was nearly destroyed in the fighting, and the toll for Fallujah has also been high -- almost 100,000 additional people driven from their homes and forced to scramble for water, food and shelter.
The Norwegian Refugee Council, which monitors and advocates for refugees around the world, cautioned that neighborhoods must be checked for mines and other dangers before Fallujah's refugees can return home.
Credit: John Bacon, @jmbacon, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo HAIDAR MOHAMMED, ALI AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 363
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
