"Belgium's busiest airport remained closed for a seventh day Monday because of last week's terror attack, snarling travel as passengers returned from a long Easter holiday.
\"My plans for last week got disrupted in places but in the end I got to where I was going,\" said Nicholas White, a consultant who lives near Brussels.
White, a native of Northern Ireland, flew from England to Belgium's smaller regional airport in Antwerp, 35 miles to the north. He said many people opted to stay home rather than risk a difficult trip and further attacks.
On Monday, Belgium authorities charged three people detained during Sunday's raids with participating in terrorist activities, but a judge released another suspect, according to state media RTBF.
Authorities said the trio were part of a group of nine rounded up Sunday. Five were released later Sunday, and authorities said Monday that the sixth remaining detainee was released without charges, RTBF reported.
The death toll also rose Monday after Belgian Health Minister Maggie De Block said four of those wounded in the attacks have died, bringing the number of dead to 35.
Brussels Airport, also known as Brussel-Zaventem Airport, is the 21st busiest airport in Europe, in part because Brussels is home to both NATO and European Union headquarters. It handled more than 23 million passengers in 2015 and about 3 million in the first two months of this year.
The airport had hoped to resume partial operations by Tuesday, a week after suicide bombings at the airport and a metro station. But airport authority said it would remain closed indefinitely to allow police, military and aviation officials to test security measures in a temporary structure.
The closure means that Belgium's smaller airports in Liege, Charleroi and Antwerp are stretched to the limit. Antwerp's airport, which usually handles five flights on a Sunday, was inundated with 40 takeoffs and landings on Easter Sunday.
\"I have worked here for 20 years and have never seen anything like this,\" airport commander Wim Verbist said Monday. \"Tomorrow, we are expecting 58 commercial (flights).\"
Many travelers said the added volume strained the local terminals, causing long waits and missed flights. \"There was a substantial delay at immigration in Antwerp, where it seemed to be fairly clear that the border guards maybe weren't familiar with the setup,\" White said.
Charleroi Airport, about an hour south of the capital city, also was flooded with passengers. \"These extra (flights) represent 10,000 additional passengers per day compared to the traditional situation for the Easter break,\" airport spokesman Vincent Grassa said.
Elizabeth Slate, 35, a production manager at a publishing house in London, was determined to make it to Brussels for her niece's first birthday. \"We booked a month ago,\" Slate said. \"Then Tuesday happened, it was awful. But we never had any doubt about coming. So we drove here,\" she said.
Contributing: Maya Vidon, Patrick Costello in Berlin, Paul Ames in Lisbon and Steph Solis in McLean, Va.
Credit: Linda A. Thompson, Janon Fisher, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo GEERT VANDEN WIJNGAERT, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 542
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
