"More than 18,000 civilians have been killed in Iraq since January 2014 as sectarian violence continues to devastate the country, the United Nations says in a report released Tuesday.
More than 36,000 others were wounded and more than 3 million people displaced from Jan. 1, 2014, to Oct. 31, 2015, the report says. The numbers include only documented cases, meaning the true toll could be much higher.
\"The violence suffered by civilians in Iraq remains staggering,\" the report says. \"The so-called 'Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant' continues to commit systematic and widespread violence and abuses of international human rights law and humanitarian law. These acts may, in some instances, amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and possibly genocide.\"
Zeid Ra'ad al Hussein, U.N. high commissioner for human rights, called for stepped up efforts to end the violence. \"Even the obscene casualty figures fail to accurately reflect exactly how terribly civilians are suffering in Iraq,\" al Hussein said. \"The figures capture those who were killed or maimed by overt violence, but countless others have died from the lack of access to basic food, water or medical care.\"
The report was compiled by the U.N. Assistance Mission for Iraq and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. The numbers are based on data from victims, survivors or witnesses, the report says.
The report details \"gruesome public spectacles\" of shootings, beheadings, bulldozing, burning people alive and throwing people off the top of buildings. The report says up to 900 children in Mosul may have been abducted for religious and military training by the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS.
\"ISIL continues to target members of different ethnic and religious communities, systematically persecuting these groups and subjecting them to a range of abuses and violations,\" the report says. \"These acts exemplify ISIL apparent policy of suppressing, permanently expelling, or destroying some communities. Women and children remain particularly vulnerable, with ongoing reports of sexual violence, including sexual slavery, and the forcible recruitment and use of children in hostilities.\"
Credit: John Bacon, USA TODAY
Word count: 362
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
