"As the United States and Russia struggle to negotiate terms of a cease-fire in Syria, the five-year civil war has unleashed such an array of fighters that some forces are both allies and enemies, depending on which groups they encounter on the battlefield.
To understand the complexities of a war involving more than a dozen militias and foreign nations, here is a rundown on the combatants, their goals, their allies and their enemies:
Syrian government
Syrian President Bashar Assad's domestic allies include his clan of minority Alawite Muslims, other religious communities, foreign Shiite fighters backed by Iran and Russian help in the form of supplies and air support. His main fighting forces include:
Syrian Armed Forces: The Syrian army has been worn down by five years of fighting, while the Syrian air force remains a potent force.
National Defense Forces: This is a paramilitary organization established with Iranian support to hold and control territory.
Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and foreign Shiite militias: They are responsible for spreading the Iranian revolution and foreign military operations. The main enemy includes Syrian opposition groups and the Islamic State.
Islamic State
The al-Qaeda offshoot has seized territory that spans the Syrian-Iraqi border. Most of its revenue is generated from kidnapping, taxation and oil sales.
Its fighters include local militants and recruits from across the Arab world, Europe and elsewhere.
Its enemies include Kurdish militias, an al-Qaeda group known as the Nusra Front, a U.S.-led coalition and sometimes Assad and Russia.
Syrian Democratic Forces
The U.S. military has stitched together an alliance of Syrian Kurdish and Arab forces to fight the Islamic State. It is led by the YPG, the Syrian arm of the Kurdish Worker's Party (PKK) in Turkey, which both Turkey and the U.S. State Department consider a terrorist organization.
The group has worked with Russia and has maintained relations with the Syrian government, which shares some territory.
Enemies include the Islamic State, the anti-Assad Syrian opposition and Turkey, which fears Kurds will carve out an independent enclave along the Syrian-Turkish border.
Syrian opposition
These include perhaps hundreds of militias across Syria with ideologies that include a range of views, from nationalist democrats to hard-line Islamists. They are composed of Arabs, Sunnis, Christians, Druze and Kurds. A small number are considered terrorist groups by the State Department. They include:
Nusra Front: Al-Qaeda's Syrian franchise and rival of the Islamic State supports more moderate Sunni Arab groups fighting to overthrow Assad. The United States considers Nusra a terrorist group, but many U.S.-supported groups fight alongside it. Nusra changed its name to Jabhat Fatah al-Sham, claiming to have \"disengaged\" from all \"external affiliations.\" The group receives donations from individuals in the Persian Gulf.
Its enemies include Assad, Russia, Iran, Hezbollah, Syrian Democratic Forces and the Islamic State.
Ahrar al-Sham: The hard-line Salafi Sunni opposition militia works closely with the Nusra Front and the Free Syrian Army, a rebel group led by former army officers.
Allies include Turkey and Qatar.
Enemies include Assad, Russia, Iran, Syrian Democratic Forces and the Islamic State.
Jaish al-Islam: It is a conservative Salafi opposition militia.
Allies include Saudi Arabia and Turkey.
Enemies include Assad, Iran, Syrian Democratic Forces and the Islamic State.
Southern Front: This is a coalition of rebel groups, including the Free Syrian Army.
Allies include the United States, the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Jordan and Turkey.
Enemies include Assad and the Islamic State.
Credit: Oren Dorell, @orendorell, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Aleppo Media Center via AP
Word count: 630
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
