"Police and military troops will fan across New York City this week in a show of force after an explosion that injured 29 people, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Sunday, adding that New Yorkers and visitors will see \"a very substantial NYPD presence this week -- bigger than ever.\"
The heightened alert came as a result of Saturday's explosion and because world leaders are gathering Monday for the United Nations General Assembly. President Obama is likely to attend the annual meeting Tuesday, the last of his eight-year tenure.
De Blasio and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said the explosion had no apparent links to international terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State, though it was early in the investigation.
De Blasio said a large police force will man subways, bus depots and other busy areas throughout the city. About 1,000 state police and National Guard troops will be dispatched to patrol the city, Cuomo said.
\"When you see the amount of damage, we were really very lucky there were no fatalities,\" Cuomo said after touring the blast site Sunday. \"Whoever placed these bombs, we will find them, and they will be brought to justice. Period.\"
Saturday's explosion occurred just after 8:30 p.m. ET at 133 W. 23rd St. between Sixth and Seventh Avenues.
None of the injuries appeared to be life-threatening, the New York City Fire Department said. All those injured were released from area hospitals by Sunday morning, according to Cuomo's office.
De Blasio called the blast \"a very serious incident\" but echoed Cuomo's comment of no known connection to any organized terror group. \"We have a lot more work to do to determine what type of motivation was behind this,\" he said. He urged New Yorkers to remain vigilant and asked for patience as investigators unravel more details about the incident.
Asked whether the attack should be called terrorism, Cuomo told CNN, \"Frankly, it's semantics.\" He said, \"It was an intentional bombing. It was not accidental. It was criminal. It was violent. There was no apparent link at this time to any international terrorist organization. No national terrorist organization has taken credit for it, and there was no apparent political purpose. There was also no apparent target besides the general populous.\"
New York City Police Commissioner James O'Neill said he reviewed one surveillance video, and investigators reviewed more footage recovered from the scene. They also talked to witnesses. O'Neill urged anyone with information to call 800-577-TIPS. Multiple tips have come in since the phone number was released Saturday night.
\"We're in the middle of a very complex post-blast investigation,\" O'Neill said.
The explosion was from an apparent homemade device placed in the Chelsea neighborhood in front of a residence for the blind and near a major thoroughfare crowded with restaurants.
A second device, possibly a pressure cooker, was found four blocks away on West 27th Street and was safely removed early Sunday, according to the New York Police Department. The pressure cooker was attached to wiring and a cellphone and had been placed inside a plastic bag, the Associated Press reported. The device was removed with a robot and taken to a department firing range in the Bronx.
Cuomo said both devices were similar in design. Two pressure cookers were used in the Boston Marathon bombing that killed three people and injured more than 260 in 2013.
The explosion may have come from a construction toolbox in front of a building, the AP reported.
Cuomo said there was significant damage to property around the blast site. \"There's glass everywhere, shrapnel everywhere,\" he said.
He urged New Yorkers to return to work Monday without fear of further incidents. \"They want to make you afraid and worry about going into New York City or New York state,\" Cuomo said. \"We're not going to let them instill fear, because then they would win.\"
Rick Jervis reported from Austin.
Credit: Rick Jervis, USA TODAY, and Rich Cowen
Illustration
photo CARMINE GALASSO, USA TODAY Network
Word count: 699
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
