"Lt. Gen. Sean MacFarland was stationed in the United States when Ramadi fell to Islamic extremists last May.
\"That was a difficult day,\" MacFarland told me. \"I heard from Gold Star families,\" he says, referring to parents and spouses of U.S. servicemembers killed in fighting in the city almost 10 years ago.
Watching images of the Islamic State flag flying over the city's government center was tough for veterans who helped liberate Ramadi from al-Qaeda in 2006. MacFarland commanded the U.S. brigade in 2006 that helped drive al-Qaeda from the city, an accomplishment that helped turn the tide of war across Iraq.
Today, MacFarland is back in Iraq, commanding the coalition fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. Ramadi has once again been liberated. This time it was Iraqis -- not Americans -- who led the fight to retake Ramadi, a Sunni city about 65 miles west of Baghdad. The United States has about 3,500 troops in Iraq, helping to train and advise Iraqi forces. They are not directly involved in combat.
After more than six months of fighting, the Iraqi government recently announced it had liberated the city.
Part of warfare is science. Commanders study historic battles, drawing lessons from the past and assembling a plan. But war is also intensely personal. For the Americans who fought there, Ramadi wasn't just a strategic dot on the map.
The Ramadi campaign was successful in 2006 largely because of an alliance that Americans formed with tribal leaders.
In 2006, MacFarland formed an alliance with Sheik Sattar abu Reisha, a colorful and charismatic tribal leader, whose support was instrumental in getting the population to line up behind the American effort. Sattar was killed a year later, but by then there was no stopping the momentum against militants.
Within a matter of days last year, the Islamic State seemed to wipe out everything the Iraqis and Americans had fought for. Many of the Iraqis who had risked everything to fight alongside Americans nearly a decade earlier watched their city fall into the hands of a terror group more brutal than al-Qaeda.
\"It's hard for me to imagine the utter frustration that they must have felt when that happened,\" MacFarland says. \"Now that we've liberated hundreds of people in Ramadi, we're finding out what a living hell that was.\" Islamic State fighters used civilians as human shields and executed anyone they suspected of disloyalty. \"As things got desperate, they became more brutal,\" MacFarland says.
The Iraqi offensive to retake Ramadi was not speedy, but it did get the job done. The final assault was led by Iraq's counterterrorism forces, called the Golden Division, an elite American-trained assault force.
Even after the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Iraq in 2011, the United States was able to keep small teams of American Special Forces with the Golden Division, which paid off in Ramadi. \"That was the one part of the Iraqi security forces we never lost contact with,\" MacFarland says.
The assault forces were supported by Iraq's conventional army. Iraqi forces were also aided by coalition airstrikes. Local police will take over security in the city once it has been cleared.
Morale and confidence are as important as weapons and troop numbers in warfare. It was a dispirited Iraqi military that largely collapsed in 2014 as Islamic State militants poured across the border from Syria.
The victory in Ramadi has given Iraq's military a boost and confidence that the various elements of Iraq's security forces can work together. \"The enemy is very beatable,\" MacFarland says.
In Ramadi it will take months, if not longer, to rebuild. \"The enemies were far worse than al-Qaeda in Iraq in terms of deliberately destroying infrastructure,\" MacFarland says. Tribal leaders, including some who fought with Americans in 2006, will help put the city back together, once again.
The Islamic State proved it could destroy Ramadi, but it couldn't defeat it.
Michaels is a USA TODAY military writer and former Marine infantry officer.
Illustration
photo photo by Sterling Jensen
Word count: 705
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
