"At least 21 people are dead and several others wounded after Taliban gunmen climbed over the wall into a university in northwestern Pakistan on Wednesday and began firing indiscriminately, according to witnesses and Pakistani officials. At least four gunmen were killed.
The attack, which included explosions, broke out as about 600 people were attending a poetry recital at Bacha Khan University, serving 3,000 students in Charsadda, near the city of Peshawar.
Regional Police Chief Saeed Wazir put the death toll at 21.
Army spokesman Lt. Gen. Asim Bajwa said on Twitter that four attackers were killed.
The attack erupted in the same province as the 2014 Peshawar school attack that killed more than 150 people, mostly children, and shocked the nation.
Wednesday's attackers got into the compound by climbing over back walls around 9:30 a.m. and opening fire on a security guard. They then made their way to the administration building and the male students' dorms, firing indiscriminately, Wazir said.
\"I heard two explosions near the boys' hostel,\" said student Zahoor Khan. \"I don't know if these were suicide attacks or grenade attacks.\"
Attempts to battle the gunmen were complicated by a deep fog that had settled over the area, making visibility difficult.
\"I rushed to evacuate the hostel and, while I was running, I got shot with bullets,\" said security guard Nur Rehman, who was hospitalized. \"Due to the fog, we were unable to see the terrorists.\"
A Taliban leader, Khalifa Umar Mansoor, claimed responsibility for Wednesday's attack, the Associated Press reported. Mansoor was the mastermind behind the deadly December 2014 attack on the Peshawar school.
A spokesman for the main Taliban faction in Pakistan, however, disowned the group behind the attack. Mohammad Khurasani said Wednesday's attack was \"un-Islamic\" and that Taliban fighters \"consider the students in the non-military institutions the future of our jihad movement.\"
Credit: Naila Inayat, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Hasham Ahmed, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 350
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
