"KABUL, Afghanistan -- After courting Pakistan for more than a year, President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan changed course on Monday and warned that he would lodge a complaint with the United Nations Security Council if Pakistan refuses to take military action against Taliban leaders operating from its soil to wage an increasingly deadly insurgency across Afghanistan.
Mr. Ghani has tried to persuade Pakistan's leadership, particularly its powerful military, to bring the insurgent leaders to the negotiating table. But an increase in Taliban violence, including a brutal attack last week in the heart of Kabul that killed at least 64 people and wounded more than 300, has forced the Afghan president to effectively end the negotiations, which have been a cornerstone effort of his troubled time in office.
\"I want to make it clear that we do not expect Pakistan to bring the Taliban to talks,\" Mr. Ghani said Monday in a rare joint session of the two houses of the Afghan Parliament. \"If we do not see a change, despite our hopes and efforts for regional cooperation, we will be forced to turn to the U.N. Security Council and launch serious diplomatic efforts.\"
In quadrilateral talks over the past year that also involved the United States and China, Pakistan had pledged \"in writing\" to go after Taliban leaders who refused to join the peace process, Mr. Ghani said.
That is what Mr. Ghani said he has asked Pakistan to do: \"Take military action against those who have their centers in Pakistan.\"
Despite promises from Pakistan to bring Taliban leaders to talks in the hopes of ending the long conflict, the peace efforts seem to have gone nowhere. The insurgency has begun another spring offensive, which promises to be bloodier than in years past.
In his address on Monday, Mr. Ghani broke with the former administration's tactic of describing the Taliban as discontented brothers in the hopes of urging them to talks. Mr. Ghani called the insurgents terrorists who \"take pleasure in the torn-up bodies of our innocents,\" and their leaders \"slavelike\" and involved in narcotics mafias. He also declared the end of \"amnesty without cause\" for arrested Taliban, many of whom had in the past returned to the battlefield after release from prisons.
The Taliban were quick to respond; a spokesman posted messages on Twitter during Mr. Ghani's address.
\"The nation is not blind -- it realizes who is a slave, and who is a hireling,\" said Zabihullah Mujahid, the Taliban spokesman, posting a picture of senior government officials listening to the former commander of NATO and United States forces in Afghanistan, Gen. John F. Campbell. \"We will continue fighting until the occupation is ended.\"
Although the door for peace talks is not completely shut, officials now say Mr. Ghani, under enormous pressure because of stagnation on every other front, was forced to take a tougher stance as Pakistan repeatedly failed to fulfill promises. Mr. Ghani's advisers are nevertheless encouraged that during the quadrilateral process, Pakistan has come out of a long-held denial about Taliban sanctuaries on its soil, both in private discussions as well as in public.
Satraj Aziz, the adviser on foreign policy to Pakistan's prime minister, said last month that his country had influence over the Taliban, but not control.
\"We have some influence on them because their leadership is in Pakistan, and they get some medical facilities, their families are here,\" he said. \"So we can use those levers to pressurize them to say, Come to the table.\"
Haroun Mir, a political analyst based in Kabul, said he did not see Afghanistan capable of rallying the kind of international pressure to isolate Pakistan, which has displayed more skill at dealing with such pressures in the past.
\"The fact that this process occurred in the presence of China and the United States, at least these two nations will now know that Afghanistan tried with honesty,\" Mr. Mir said. \"Whether the capacity is there to follow up -- that is early to tell.\"
Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.
AuthorAffiliation
MUJIB MASHAL Follow Mujib Mashal on Twitter @MujMash .
Photograph
President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan, Left, Speaking with the Pakistani Prime Minister, Nawaz Sharif, in November 2014. (Photograph by B.K. Bangash/Associated Press)
Word count: 754
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 26, 2016"
