"CAIRO -- A gunman fatally shot a Christian minister on Egypt's volatile Sinai Peninsula on Thursday, security officials said. The Islamic State, in a message distributed on social media, claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Coptic Orthodox minister, the Rev. Rafael Moussa, 46, was standing outside a car repair shop near St. George's Church in El Arish, the main town in northern Sinai, when a masked gunman walked up and shot him, officials said. The assailant threatened witnesses before fleeing, said the Rev. Gabriel Ibrahim, a minister at a nearby church, speaking in a telephone interview.
In its message, the Islamic State described Father Moussa as a \"disbelieving combatant\" but did not provide further justification for his killing, according to a translation by the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors extremist activity online.
It was the latest in a series of attacks on Coptic Christians in northern Sinai, where the Egyptian Army has been fighting an Islamist group that pledges allegiance to the Islamic State.
Church officials said eight members of their church have died in targeted attacks since 2013. The violence has caused some Christians to leave the area for Cairo and other cities, said the Rev. Boules Haliem, a spokesman for the Coptic Orthodox church.
Separately on Thursday, a police officer was killed by a bomb in El Arish, state-owned news outlets said.
The violence coincided with a public holiday marking the mass public protests in June 2013 against the country's democratically elected president, Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, which paved the way for his military-led ouster.
As Islamist violence has surged in recent years, in Sinai and in major cities, Christian communities have also occasionally been attacked, particularly in rural areas.
Discrimination against Christians, who make up about 10 percent of the population, has long been a delicate subject in predominantly Muslim Egypt. Copts say they suffer social prejudice and workplace discrimination.
They protested loudly in May after a Muslim mob stripped a Christian woman and paraded her naked through the streets in southern Minya Province.
The episode occurred after rumors spread that the woman's son had been involved with a Muslim woman.
Word count: 367
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 1, 2016"
