"OSLO -- Anders Behring Breivik, the Norwegian extremist who killed 77 people in a bomb and gun rampage in 2011, lives in conditions that would seem luxurious by American incarceration standards: a three-room suite with windows that includes a treadmill, a fridge, a television with DVD player and even a Sony PlayStation.
But on Wednesday, a Norwegian court found that the government had violated his human rights, concluding that his long-term solitary confinement posed a threat to his mental health. Mr. Breivik has virtually no contact with other inmates and is subjected to frequent strip searches and searches of his cell. At a trial in March, he argued that his isolation amounted to torture.
Judge Helen Andenaes Sekulic of the Oslo District Court, who oversaw the trial, which was held at the prison for security reasons, found on Wednesday that prison officials had violated an article of the European Convention of Human Rights that prohibits \"inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.\" She directed the government to reduce the extent of Mr. Breivik's isolation -- though she did not specify how -- and ordered the government to pay Mr. Breivik's legal fees of 331,000 kroner, or about $40,600.
However, she dismissed a related complaint that the prison officials had also violated the convention's guarantee of respect for private and family life, and rejected Mr. Breivik's demand for fewer restrictions on receiving visitors and sending and receiving phone calls and letters. The government has said that it restricts and censors his communications to prevent him from encouraging violent extremism.
A government lawyer, Adele Matheson Mestad, said that officials disagreed with the court's conclusions and were evaluating whether to appeal.
The decision outraged many Norwegians. \"What a pathetic verdict,\" Silje Grytten, a political adviser to the Labor Party in the Norwegian Parliament, wrote on Twitter.
On July 22, 2011, Mr. Breivik killed eight people with a bomb at a government building in central Oslo and then fatally shot 69 people at a summer camp on the island of Utoya. Dozens of others were wounded.
Mr. Breivik claimed that he had been on a \"martyr operation\" to stop a Muslim invasion of Europe, leaving behind a manifesto depicting himself as a modern-day crusader against jihadists and part of a larger organization.
At his trial in 2012, the court found that he was instead a lone wolf, a computer game obsessive who had prepared his rants and plotted the killings from a bedroom in his mother's house.
He was sentenced to 21 years in prison, the maximum, though he could serve longer if he is deemed a threat to society.
Mr. Breivik sued prison officials last year, asserting that the government was \"slowly killing\" him.
His lawyer, Oystein Storrvik, said that Mr. Breivik had already shown signs of emotional damage, though the psychiatric reports he submitted did not appear to definitively support the claim.
Mr. Storrvik pleaded that the court \"see beyond the popular cry of the masses\" and stick to strict legal rules. He compared Mr. Breivik's condition with that of the terrorist known as The Jackal, who had been allowed to see several lawyers, had married one of them and had published a book from his cell.
Mr. Breivik's behavior during the trial made headlines and renewed public outrage. He complained about his microwave dinners and cold coffee.
He gave a Nazi-style salute and said he had renounced his faith in Christ in favor of the Norse god Odin.
He demanded the right to publish a political tract every third year, in print or online, and said he had written two books already, \"The Breivik Diaries\" and \"The Nordic State,\" but was not allowed to seek publication of them.
Government lawyers defended the strict confinement -- noteworthy in a country known for a justice system that emphasizes rehabilitation over retribution -- and said Mr. Breivik was \"still a very dangerous man.\" They noted that Mr. Breivik has daily access to fresh air and health care.
Ms. Mestad, one of the government lawyers, noted that Mr. Breivik had attempted to communicate with extremists in the United States and Europe, and noted that a variety of extremists -- in Poland, the Czech Republic and Britain -- had claimed to be inspired by Mr. Breivik.
Ms. Mestad called his ideology a \"poisonous mix of dehumanization, anti-Islamism, xenophobia and deep hatred.\"
Lars Erik Berntzen, a guest researcher at the Center for Research on Extremism in Oslo who has studied messages written by Mr. Breivik from prison and posted online, said in a telephone interview that Mr. Breivik's fans were initially those with an interest in mass killings, as well as women who wrote him love letters, but that he now mostly tries to communicate with like-minded ideological extremists.
Cato Hemmingby, a scholar at the Norwegian Police University College and co-author of a book on Mr. Breivik, said in an interview that it was \"especially the lack of access to the Internet and the communication control\" that had angered Mr. Breivik.
Randi Rosenqvist, a court-appointed psychiatrist who interviewed Mr. Breivik in 2011, told the court during the trial that Mr. Breivik seemed rational and purposeful, and would \"resume dramatic measures\" if released.
Since 2012, Mr. Breivik has refused to talk to psychiatrists, saying they are a part of the plot against him.
Ulrik Fredrik Malt, a psychiatrist and professor emeritus at Oslo University Hospital who testified in Mr. Breivik's 2012 trial, has long claimed that Mr. Breivik has Asperger's syndrome.
The case has divided public opinion. Norway is a famously liberal society and some argue that Mr. Breivik, even if a monster, deserves to be treated humanely.
\"It is important that society answers Breivik with the means at the disposal of the very democracy he attacked,\" Harald Stanghelle, political editor of Aftenposten, a daily newspaper in Oslo, said in an interview. \"That is what Norway displayed in 2012, and that is the same now.\"
He added: \"If there is anything we can be sure of now, it is that he will most likely be locked up for life.\"
Word count: 1021
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 21, 2016"
