"SEATTLE -- F.B.I. agents moved in on Wednesday night to encircle the last four holdouts at a federal wildlife refuge in eastern Oregon that has been occupied since early January by armed antigovernment militants.
Negotiations were continuing into the evening, the F.B.I. said in a statement, and no shots had been fired, the agency said. But in a live phone feed that streamed for several hours on YouTube with tens of thousands of listener/viewers, the occupiers said they believed that the government agents had closed in to kill them. They said that they would not fire their weapons first, but that tear gas would be considered an attack that would justify shooting back.
\"They don't want a peaceful resolution, they want to kill us,\" Sandy Anderson, one of the occupiers, said in the live feed.
[Video: LIVE call from Refuge - FBI Seige Happening. Watch on YouTube.]
Malheur National Wildlife Refuge, about six hours from Portland, was taken over by a small band of armed militants on Jan 2. They demanded that two local ranchers, imprisoned on arson charges for a fire that spread to public lands, be released, and that federal lands that the occupiers said were improperly taken from local ranchers in decades past be returned to local or private control.
On Wednesday, the F.B.I. said in its statement, one of the occupiers rode an all-terrain vehicle outside the barricades established by the militia at the refuge. Agents attempted to approach the driver, the statement said, and he returned to the encampment at the refuge at high speed.
Law enforcement officers then moved to contain the remaining occupiers by placing agents at barricades immediately ahead of and behind the area where the occupiers were camping.
\"It has never been the F.B.I.'s desire to engage these armed occupiers in any way other than through dialogue, and to that end, the F.B.I. has negotiated with patience and restraint in an effort to resolve the situation peacefully,\" said Greg Bretzing, special agent in charge of the F.B.I. in Oregon, in a statement. \"However, we reached a point where it became necessary to take action in a way that best ensured the safety of those on the refuge, the law enforcement officers who are on scene, and the people of Harney County who live and work in this area.\"
Later, Michele Fiore, a Nevada assemblywoman who has expressed sympathy for the occupiers, got on the phone, as did an F.B.I. negotiator the occupiers called \"Mark.\"
Mark was on the phone only briefly. And Ms. Fiore spoke on the live stream to the occupiers, promising them that she was on her way to help negotiate their exit.
Ms. Fiore encouraged the group to remain calm, drop their weapons and leave the refuge. \"We don't need our weapons right now,\" she said, adding that the F.B.I. would not fire on the occupiers. \"The world is watching.\"
Ms. Fiore, who is running for Congress from Nevada, transformed during the course of the live stream from an aspiring negotiator to something closer to a counselor, telling the panicked occupiers to remain calm, leading them in prayer and encouraging them to disarm.
At another point she encouraged them to invest in the political process, telling them, \"We need your voice on a committee.\"
The occupiers were unconvinced. Voices intermittently screamed in the background, \"They don't care.\"
Late Wednesday, the occupiers said they would be willing to turn themselves in accompanied by Ms. Fiore and the evangelist Franklin Graham. A spokesman for Mr. Graham said he did not know about any agreements between the evangelist and the F.B.I.
\"Having spent the past two days with Franklin and having heard him talk about this case, I am not aware of any such deal,\" the spokesman, Mark DeMoss, said in an email.
The remaining four occupiers repeatedly invoked the killing of Robert \"LaVoy\" Finicum by federal agents during a Jan. 26 traffic stop as a sign of the government's unwillingness to bring the standoff to a peaceful end.
Mr. Finicum was shot when he reached for a firearm, the F.B.I. said. Ammon Bundy, the leader of the occupation, was arrested during the stop along with several other members of the group.
Wednesday night, Andy Dunbar, 53, who lives an eighth of a mile from the refuge with his wife, Vena, described the scene at the location: a flood light rig on a hill, and about five Bearcats around the occupiers' camp -- vehicles that had previously not been present. The F.B.I. called and instructed them to stay in their homes, Mr. Dunbar said.
\"It's been tough, it's been damn tough,\" he said of the occupation. \"I'm feeling really excited that this might be over with. It's like: Yeah -- finally we'll be able to get this resolved.\"
Credit: KIRK JOHNSON; Liam Stack, Julie Turkewitz and Alan Blinder contributed to this report.
Word count: 822
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 11, 2016"
