"CORRECTION APPENDED. CAMP BASTION, Afghanistan -- Generals tend to create a lot of excitement when they move around the battlefield, especially in a place as central to the Afghan war as Helmand Province. And so it was with Maj. Gen. M. Moein Faqir as he prepared to board his helicopter to fly back to Camp Bastion, the venerable British complex he now commands.
As the commander of the 215th Corps of the Afghan National Army, General Faqir is the top military man in Helmand Province, more than half of which has been overrun by Taliban in the past year. After a visit two weeks ago in Lashkar Gah, the provincial capital, he was at the airstrip, with full entourage in tow: aides de camp, bodyguards, camp followers -- and gardeners with lots of flower pots.
Everyone piled onboard a Russian-made MI-17 helicopter, one of four that do dual duty as transports and air ambulances, its pilot also a general of Communist-era vintage. And then the ground crew loaded up the center aisle with the flower pots, earth and all, a score of them blooming with African daisies, begonias, morning glories, nasturtiums and something vaguely petunia-like and purple.
General Faqir explained: \"Helmand is a desert. We need some color out here.\"
Back at Camp Bastion, as he sat down for an interview in his headquarters, soldiers went right to work outside, shoveling sheep manure into flower beds arranged around the corps flagpole and soaking everything down with trucked-in water.
General Faqir was appointed corps commander four months ago, with two of Helmand's 14 administrative districts in Taliban hands. The insurgents were so close to the outskirts of Lashkar Gah that officials in the capital were evacuating members of their families, even while assuring the public there was nothing to fear.
Those Taliban advances coincided with a scandal over ghost soldiers -- thousands of men listed among the 215th's battalions for whom salaries were being paid, to someone at least, but who never actually made roll calls, if they had ever even drawn breath. General Faqir's predecessor was fired as a result, and General Faqir came in to clean things up, which he says he did successfully.
Battlefield success, however, has been more elusive. Since General Faqir came, the Taliban have taken over three more districts, including Now Zad and Musa Qala. Both are important agricultural zones and major sources of opium poppy, and Musa Qala is a center of opium refining and heroin production.
General Faqir's response to that has been to publicly dismiss Now Zad and Musa Qala -- both fought over bitterly for the past 10 years by American and British troops -- as \"unimportant.\"
\"I've changed my tactics against the Taliban,\" he said. Instead of using heavy weapons against them in thickly populated districts, he said, he has shifted his emphasis to night raids.
Teams of his special forces soldiers, usually with American advisers along, he said, have been raiding homes suspected of housing Taliban members. The result, he said, was a 70 percent decrease in casualties among his troops.
\"There used to be 30, 40 wounded A.N.A. in the hospital here at a time,\" he said. \"No numbers like that now.\"
One of his own officers, however, was openly critical of that. \"The fighting has died down because the corps commander stopped fighting the Taliban,\" said Col. Mohammad Ahmadzai, one of the helicopter pilots. \"He's lost three districts since he's been here.\"
General Faqir scoffed at that, saying districts change hands all the time in Helmand and could easily change again tomorrow.
General Faqir has not, however, lost Sangin District, the strategic and hugely symbolic district in northern Helmand where more American and British troops lost their lives than in any other Afghan district.
\"The Taliban tried very hard to take Sangin, and they failed,\" General Faqir said. According to elders and officials from Sangin, only heavy American bombing and American Special Operations troops have managed to keep the district center in Sangin from falling to the Taliban -- although the insurgents again have the rest of the district.
Last month, the American military reinforced Helmand with an unspecified number of troops from the United States Army's 87th Infantry Regiment, part of the 10th Mountain Divison; General Faqir put their numbers at \"more than a battalion.\" (American battalions usually have around 700 to 800 troops.) Other estimates by Afghan officials and analysts have ranged from 700 to 1,000 new Americans.
The new troops are meant to reinforce Afghan training, with 1,500 fresh Afghan recruits now at Camp Bastion, intended to replace some of those missing ghost soldiers, as well as heavy losses from the past year.
At its height, Camp Bastion and its adjoining outposts, including the Marines' Camp Leatherneck, housed 22,000 American, British and coalition service members, plus contractors and Afghan troops.
Although the 215th Corps has 18,000 soldiers on its books, most of them are deployed around the province, leaving garrison troops, new recruits and Afghan special forces, no more than 5,000 in all, rattling around in the sprawling, built-to-last facility.
The most immediately evident change is the removal of all the \"5 M.P.H.\" speed limit signs, a staple of American war-zone bases.
With the return of the battalion from the 87th Infantry, plus an unknown number of American Special Operations troops, there are probably 2,000 or more Americans here now, too. They are kept separate from the Afghans and mostly out of view, except when they come over to the Afghan side to hold training sessions.
The Afghan garrison commander, Col. Nasimullah Alishangai, has been here 10 years now. The rose garden in his personal compound shows it.
Huge bushes with half a dozen varieties -- some already blooming -- surround a roofed pavilion with two Life Fitness treadmills, left behind after the American withdrawal in 2014 and apparently not used since then. At the other end of the garden is a handsome grove of tall, spindly white birches, arranged in a horseshoe around a seating area.
\"When I first came to this place, there were hardly any security forces,\" Colonel Alishangai said. \"We only had the Third Brigade. Now we have an entire army corps here, and still the situation is getting worse day by day.\"
Colonel Alishangai is proud of the base's fully equipped, 100-bed military hospital, where there are many more doctors than patients -- just five wounded Afghan soldiers during a visit on March 21. A couple months ago, the hospital was nearly full.
Helicopters of the same sort that transported General Faqir and his flowers are also pressed into service as air ambulances, and are in chronically short supply. General Faqir said he would happily deploy 10 of them if possible.
In the good old days -- as a lot of the Afghans refer to the time before the American pullout -- there was no need of Afghan medical evacuation aircraft, because the American military did that for them. Now, the Americans' much more limited evacuation assets are generally for Westerners only.
General Faqir and his senior officers are happy to see even the limited return of the American infantry troops. \"We don't need them now, but of course they're our fellow soldiers, and they're going to fight shoulder to shoulder with us, if we need them to,\" he said.
In the meantime, the Afghan officers have their flower gardens to tend. In the old days, said Col. Shah Wali Zazai, the head of the new recruits' training center, some of the American military mentors and trainers scoffed at the gardeners of Camp Bastion.
\"You see that row of trees?\" Colonel Zazai asked, pointing to a long procession of willows alongside the road to the training ground. He planted them in 2004, and his American mentor asked why. \"I said: 'Just wait. One day A.N.A. soldiers will be sitting in the shade of those trees, saving on air conditioning in the barracks.' \"
The colonel paused in the shade of the willow trees, grown tall and thickly foliated. \"It's a long war,\" he said. \"See what I mean?\"
Correction: May 10, 2016, Tuesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on April 10 about Maj. Gen. M. Moein Faqir, the top military man in Helmand Province in Afghanistan, who has lost ground to the Taliban since he arrived five months ago but claims success in cleaning up corruption, misidentified the United States Army unit that reinforced the province in March. It is the 87th Infantry Regiment, which is part of the 10th Mountain Division, not the 87th Infantry Division.
Credit: ROD NORDLAND; Ahmad Shakib contributed reporting.
Photograph
Soldiers From the 215th Corps of the Afghan National Army at Camp Bastion in Helmand Province, Afghanistan, Last Month. Since Maj. Gen. M. Moein Faqir, Below, Took Over Four Months Ago, the Taliban Have Seized Three More Provincial Districts, Including Key Agricultural Regions. (Photographs by Adam Ferguson for the New York Times) Maps
Word count: 1516
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 10, 2016"
