"Deaths and injuries among civilians are a nearly inevitable result of wars, even with the precision of the U.S. military, as high explosives dropped from planes or fired from drones can create enormous damage.
Though the military acknowledges that airstrikes targeting the Islamic State have killed or wounded 26 civilians by accident, two officials, one involved in targeting and one former senior officer, say more civilians may have died from the more than 40,000 bombs dropped since the war began in August 2014.
The destruction of nearly 6,000 buildings with bombs since the war began makes it a virtual certainty that the civilian toll is higher than 26, said a senior Defense official briefed daily on the war's developments. Even if it is 10 times higher, the official said, it would be exceptionally low and reflects the military's commitment to protecting the innocent.
Central Command, which oversees the war, investigates reports of civilian casualties. Claims, even tweets, are matched against missions flown to determine whether coalition aircraft conducted bombing runs nearby. Video from drones and other aircraft track every bomb dropped, a Defense official said. If the report is deemed credible, investigators assess whether the strike complied with the laws of war and proper precautions were taken.
One such incident occurred July 4, 2015, near Raqqa, Syria. Airstrikes destroyed 16 bridges. A bomb killed a civilian driving a tractor-trailer.
Civilian deaths caused by Iraqi military operations, which occur jointly with the American-led bombing effort, are not counted, an official said.
In more than 15 years of bombing Afghanistan and Iraq, the Pentagon has put a premium on avoiding civilian casualties. The laws of war, military professionalism and the American public's aversion to killing innocents demand care and precision. Destroying the lives and property of non-combatants is self-defeating when the protection of civilians is a priority.
White House spokesman Josh Earnest said President Obama is \"justifiably proud of the great lengths we've gone to to avoid civilian casualties -- certainly greater lengths than our adversaries in this conflict.\"
The White House, Earnest said, is still working on a promised report on civilian casualties.
Airstrikes are deliberate or dynamic. A deliberate strike can be planned for a bank in Mosul, for example. Commanders can choose the best time and weapon to minimize chances civilians will be harmed. A complicating factor is the urgency of a time-sensitive mission, also known as a dynamic target. For example, an Islamic State militant attacking Iraqi troops from a rooftop machine gun nest in Ramadi is a legitimate dynamic target. Commanders must judge whether killing him puts residents on lower floors at risk of injury or death.
Soon after bombing extended to Syria in September 2014, commanders pinpointed seven buildings in Raqqa that the Islamic State used for headquarters, said a recently retired senior officer involved in targeting. The buildings were deemed off limits because they were too close to civilians to be destroyed without wounding or killing innocent bystanders, the former officer said.
Credit: Tom Vanden Brook, USA TODAY
Word count: 524
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
