"Since Sept. 11, 2001, Peter Bergen reports in his new timely book, 330 people in the United States have been charged with some kind of jihadist terrorist crime, and a startling four out of five of them were American citizens or legal permanent residents.
Many assumptions about these militants, Mr. Bergen asserts, do not hold up: Most jihadists in the United States were not young hotheads without family obligations, and the decision to turn to terrorism, for the most part, was not rooted in some traumatic life experience. According to Mr. Bergen's research, their average age was 29, and more than a third were married -- many with children. In addition, more than one in six supporters of the Islamic State in this country were women.
American jihadists, Mr. Bergen says, are \"on average, as well educated and emotionally stable as the typical citizen.
\"They are ordinary Americans.\"
Mr. Bergen's latest book, \"United States of Jihad,\" is a kind of anatomy of \"homegrown\" terrorists. Some are well known to the public, like the Boston Marathon bombers, Dzhokhar and Tamerlan Tsarnaev; others are lesser known, like Zachary Chesser of Virginia, who pleaded guilty in 2010 to providing support to the Shabab, the Qaeda affiliate in Somalia, and to inciting violence against the creators of \"South Park.\"
The author of four books on terrorism (including \"The Longest War,\" a succinct but wide-angled look at Sept. 11, the evolution of Al Qaeda, and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq), Mr. Bergen writes with authority and range, drawing on his many sources in the intelligence community, and putting recent developments like the San Bernardino, Calif., attacks in context with larger dynamics in the war on terror. His profiles of jihadists -- like those of the Sept. 11 hijackers in Terry McDermott's 2005 book, \"Perfect Soldiers,\" leave the reader with a harrowing appreciation of the banality of evil and an unnerving sense of missteps made by the authorities.
Parts of this volume will be familiar to readers who follow the subject. The sections about Anwar al-Awlaki -- an American-born cleric who evolved from an online jihadi propagandist into a senior operative in Al Qaeda's branch in Yemen, and who was targeted and killed by a United States drone strike in 2011 -- remain highly indebted to The New York Times reporter Scott Shane's revealing and impressively detailed 2015 book, \"Objective Troy.\"
Like Mr. Shane, Mr. Bergen looks at the potent role Mr. Awlaki would play (in life and posthumously) in inspiring other jihadists. He also deconstructs the arc of Mr. Awlaki's radicalization and provides a similarly detailed account of the paths that other American-born or American-raised militants would take.
Nidal Hasan, who grew up middle class in Virginia, enlisted in the Army and became, in Mr. Bergen's words, \"the deadliest lone wolf of all,\" killing 13 people at Fort Hood. David Coleman Headley, who had run a video store in Manhattan and worked as an informant for the Drug Enforcement Administration, took part in plotting the 2008 attacks in Mumbai that killed more than 160 people.
And Samir Khan, a typical Long Island teenager \"keen on video games and girls,\" became a radical jihadist blogger. After moving to Yemen, he started Inspire in 2010, an English-language webzine whose jauntily titled articles about explosives (\"Make a Bomb in the Kitchen of Your Mom\") and preparing for holy war (\"pack light\" and use a backpack, not a suitcase) seized the attention of a new generation of Western terrorists like the Tsarnaev brothers.
Mr. Bergen refrains from trying to speculate about his subjects' motivations, but points out that many militants share \"a desire for recognition or belonging.\" Cited here is a 2007 report by two New York Police Department intelligence analysts that suggests that some kind of personal difficulty (the loss of a job, the death of a family member, the experience of racism) often created a \"cognitive opening\" for the turn toward radical religious belief. Another theorist mentioned by Mr. Bergen has argued that the bonds of friendship and kinship are often more important than ideology in creating jihadist groups, underscoring the power of social networking as a recruiting tool.
By understanding the stages of radicalization of many would-be terrorists, Mr. Bergen explains, law enforcement hopes to spot potential threats and intervene before the \"jihadization\" process is complete -- or at least before a plan is carried out.
There have been cases of militants returning from abroad to attempt serious attacks in the United States: Faisal Shahzad, for instance, who was trained to make bombs by the Pakistani Taliban and left a (faulty) car bomb in Times Square in May 2010. In Mr. Bergen's view, however, a bigger threat in the United States is posed by lone-wolf terrorists, ones inspired by the Islamic State or Qaeda affiliated groups over the web.
Mr. Bergen does a nuanced job here of pointing out the difficulties of tracking lone wolves and the significant warnings missed by law enforcement. He also offers a judicious assessment of controversial F.B.I. sting operations, using often unsavory informants, and the overreach by intelligence agencies in their surveillance efforts.
The problem for counterterrorism officials in recent years, he writes, was not that they lacked information \"but that they didn't adequately understand or share the information.\" In fact, he notes, cases like those of Mr. Hasan and Mr. Headley (in which early heads-ups were dismissed or overlooked) \"argue not for the gathering of ever-vaster troves of information\" -- like the collection of telephone metadata by the National Security Agency. They instead argue, Mr. Bergen writes, for \"making smarter judgments about information collected through established, legal means.\"
In contrast \"to the most overreaching counterterrorism efforts,\" Mr. Bergen adds, \"many routine policing and intelligence initiatives have dramatically reduced the threat posed by terrorists.\" On Sept. 11, 2001, there were 16 people on the United States' no-fly list; by 2015, there were more than 40,000. He writes that more Joint Terrorism Task Force \"fusion centers\" have helped law enforcement agencies coordinate efforts, and that \"the relatively small number of successful jihadist attacks in the States\" since Sept. 11 indicate that \"American defensive measures\" (like T.S.A. airport checks) have been working as deterrents.
Mr. Bergen's detailed accounts of terror plots (both executed, foiled or failed) make for chilling reading, especially for the 83 percent of American voters who said in a recent Quinnipiac University poll that a major terrorist attack in the United States in the near future is \"very likely\" or \"somewhat likely.\"
These sorts of fears, Mr. Bergen contends, are exaggerated, and he supplies some sober perspective. While he says that it will be \"many, many years\" before jihadist terrorism \"withers and dies,\" he believes that it does not pose an existential threat like World War II or the Cold War. Rather, in his view, it represents a \"persistent, low-level threat\" that should not be allowed to \"crowd out\" other serious issues like climate change and gun violence.
In the years after Sept. 11, he says, \"an American residing in the United States was around five thousand times more likely to be killed by a fellow citizen armed with a gun than by a terrorist inspired by the ideology of Osama bin Laden.\"
United States of Jihad
­Investigating America's Homegrown Terrorists
By Peter Bergen
­Illustrated. 387 pages. Crown Publishers. $28.
AuthorAffiliation
MICHIKO KAKUTANI Follow Michiko Kakutani on Twitter: @michikokakutani
Photograph
Photo (C1); Peter Bergen, Author of \"United States of Jihad.\" (Photograph by Jeremy Freeman/Cnn) (C4)
Word count: 1276
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 26, 2016"
