"Tabesh Ahmadi arrived at this capital city's sole passport office before dawn, hoping to join more than 35,000 Afghans who have fled their country this year for Western Europe in search of peace and stability. By 6:30 a.m., the line was up to 350 people.
\"We are all aware of the risks after we cross the Turkish border and the danger of the seas, but still we want to take these risks, and we're ready to pay a lot of money to get out of Afghanistan,\" said Ahmadi, 26, a university student from Kabul.
\"We cannot find jobs here, even with a bachelor or a master's degree. We do not have a calm life, living with the fear of dying every day,\" Ahmadi said.
Nearly 15 years after the U.S.-led military intervention toppled the Taliban and $113 billion in U.S. aid spent on relief and reconstruction, Afghans are growing increasingly hopeless about the future of their war-torn nation. Deteriorating security, rampant corruption and a lack of jobs are fueling a flight of refugees who are joining the flood of millions coming to Europe.
It's a wave that reflects the failure of the U.S. military to stem gains by the Taliban, the Islamic extremist group that gave al-Qaeda chief Osama Bin Laden a safe haven before the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks.
The persistent insurgency only recently has gained ground, said Michael Kugelman, a South Asia expert at the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington, D.C. \"Over the course of 2015, the Taliban began taking over significant swaths of the country well beyond the south and the east where it has its traditional strongholds.\"
Amid the violence, the Afghan government appears powerless to end the fighting, revive a sick economy still dependent on opium exports or halt rampant corruption.
Moves to hold peace talks with the Taliban have gone nowhere despite prodding by outside nations, and prospects for a diplomatic breakthrough anytime soon are dim, Kugelman said.
At a refugee camp in Idomeni in northern Greece, near the recently closed Macedonian border, Qudsia Naib, 41, an Afghan teacher, is one of 14,000 people who fled wars in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere and are now stranded there. Naib made the more than 5,000-mile trek from Afghanistan to Greece en route to prosperous northern Europe.
Three weeks after leaving her home in northern Afghanistan, she waited anxiously with her husband and three young children -- with a fourth on the way-- to find a way to cross the border and make it to Germany.
\"If we would have been killed by the Taliban and died over there, it wouldn't have been too much of a problem,\" said Naib as her 1-year-old son slept on her lap in their cramped tent. \"But now we endured such a long journey, and we sold everything to come here. We just want a calm life for our kids, a peaceful life without threats and war.\"
Plesch reported from Idomeni, Greece.
Credit: Valerie Plesch, and Shirzad Ashoori, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Daniel Mihailescu, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 540
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
