"MANILA -- Ten sailors from Indonesia who had been held hostage in the Philippines for more than a month were released on Sunday, officials from both countries said.
President Joko Widodo of Indonesia said during a televised address in his country on Sunday night that the sailors were in good condition and would be flown to Jakarta immediately.
The 10 men were kidnapped on March 26 from a tugboat that was passing through the pirate-infested waters of the southwestern Philippines. Indonesian officials said shortly afterward that ransom had been demanded from the sailors' company, but there was no confirmation from either country on Sunday that money had changed hands.
The men were abducted by Abu Sayyaf, a militant organization that has functioned as a kidnap-for-ransom gang in the southern Philippines for more than two decades.
The Philippine military has sporadically fought the group for years and was ordered last year by President Benigno S. Aquino III to intensify operations.
Last week, after Abu Sayyaf beheaded a Canadian hostage, Mr. Aquino vowed again to kill or capture all members of the group.
\"We believe this is the result of continuing focused military operations we have been conducting,\" Restituto Padilla, a military spokesman, said of the sailors' release. \"In order to move freely, they needed to let go of some of the hostages.\"
Abu Sayyaf also abducted four Malaysian sailors passing near that area less than a week after kidnapping the 10 men from Indonesia. The Malaysian sailors were still being held, as were several other foreigners abducted separately, including a Canadian and a Norwegian kidnapped by the group from a beach resort.
Mr. Joko said in his statement that his government was working to release four other Indonesian sailors held in the Philippines. He said representatives of the two countries would meet on Thursday to discuss how to increase maritime security cooperation.
AuthorAffiliation
FLOYD WHALEY Follow Floyd Whaley on Twitter @floydwhaley .
Word count: 342
Copyright New York Times Company May 2, 2016"
