"They started arriving before dawn, pulling into the empty, lamp-lit parking lot of the Staten Island Mall, just as they had every year for the past 14 years. They had come on Sunday to board a bus to make the same short yet difficult trip to Manhattan, returning to the place where their loved ones had been killed.
Some wore T-shirts with the faces and names of husbands and daughters. A woman wearing a Fire Department baseball cap tightly clutched a framed photograph. But as they waited for the bus, the sun peeking over the trees, they were smiling as they pulled one another into hugs and kissed one another on the cheek. They retold old stories; they marveled at how much children had grown.
The group of a few dozen, ranging from teenagers to men and woman approaching 80, made up a small community that had been stitched together by a shared loss, the death of one or more of their relatives in the attacks on the World Trade Center. The gathering was as much a reunion as it was a moment to mourn, an opportunity to reconnect with people they had bonded with during the darkest time of their lives.
\"We're not strangers,\" said Edith Sparacio, whose son, Thomas, a currency trader, worked on the 85th floor of the south tower. \"We can cry. We can do whatever. We're all in the same situation.\"
The bus trip began on the first anniversary of the attacks, organized to carry families from Staten Island to Lower Manhattan for an event where the names of those lost have been recited each year. On Sept. 11, 2002, a line of 15 buses assembled outside the mall, carrying hundreds of relatives. On Sunday, the group fit on a single bus.
\"Now we're down to the core group,\" said Dennis McKeon, who organizes the trip. It might be a smaller crowd, he said, but they had become \"like a family.\"
\"They're lifetime friends now,\" he said, \"people that didn't know each other before.\"
In the days after the attacks, Mr. McKeon said he felt compelled to pitch in. His church, St. Clare's, a Roman Catholic parish in the Great Kills neighborhood, had lost more than two dozen congregants, he said, and he organized a squad of volunteers to help their families. The volunteers mowed lawns and delivered food; they drove family members to the medical examiner's office and helped them navigate the tangle of bureaucracy and paperwork to receive survivor's benefits.
Over the years, the informal group grew into an organization, called Where to Turn, of which Mr. McKeon is the executive director. It collected 98,000 T-shirts that were shipped to Haiti after the 2010 earthquake and sent toys and supplies to the police in Gulfport, Miss., for them to hand out after Hurricane Katrina. On Staten Island, the organization puts together a prom for older people, cleans up neglected houses and clears away graffiti, funded by events and grants from the city.
Still, Mr. McKeon said, the Sept. 11 families remain the organization's priority, and that includes the annual trip to ground zero.
\"Dennis is the man,\" Denise Matuza, whose husband, Walter A. Matuza Jr., was killed, said after she hugged Mr. McKeon in the parking lot. \"He helped us get through everything. He was our rock.\"
The families have also relied on one another, finding comfort in others who knew well what they had endured and could support them through the aftershocks: the children struggling with the absence of a parent, or the pregnant widow whose baby was stillborn. One of Ms. Matuza's sons, Walter, is a blind stand-up comedian; Nicholas Chiarchiaro, whose wife and niece were killed, sometimes drives him to shows in Manhattan, where Mr. Matuza introduced him to the audience as his \"chauffeur.\"
\"In the beginning, I never would have made it without everyone,\" said Michele Pizzo, whose husband, Jason Christopher DeFazio, a bond broker for Cantor Fitzgerald, was killed. \"I feel they're my family, too.\"
But whatever consolation such a community has provided, the pain that brought them together is never far from their mind. Some of them get together for dinner every so often, and Mr. Chiarchiaro recalled a night when one woman slapped a hand on the table and stood up. \"I love you all,\" she told them, \"but I wish I never met you.\" The phrase has been repeated at gatherings after that as a toast.
\"It just kind of fits us perfectly,\" he said.
After arriving at the World Trade Center, the group mostly went their separate ways, off to find their relative's name on the memorial. Mr. Chiarchiaro found his wife and his niece, whose names are next to each other in the footprint of the north tower. He wedged roses he brought with him into a letter of each of their names.
\"She was a beautiful woman,\" he said, recalling his wife, Dorothy J. Chiarchiaro. She and their niece had been on the 93rd floor of the north tower. \"I knew there was nothing,\" he said of his wife's remains, and in a way, he added, that brought him relief.
So much of their lives had changed in 15 years: Children had grown up and left for college; some who lost spouses had remarried; some families had moved away. But sometimes, Ms. Sparacio said, her grief still feels raw, and she cannot imagine not coming back for the anniversary.
\"My son is there,\" Ms. Sparacio said. \"I have to be there every year, because he's still there and I'm his mother and I have to be there.\"
When the bus returned to the mall parking lot in the afternoon, the passengers thanked Mr. McKeon, with a hug or a kiss on the cheek, before heading back to their cars and to their lives until next year. Ms. Sparacio said the event had done little to soothe her pain. \"My son's still not here,\" she said as she walked away.
Even so, if she has her way, when the sun rises on the next Sept. 11, she knows exactly where she will be.
Photograph
Top and Left, People Who Lost Family Members in the Sept. 11 Attacks Met Early Sunday Morning at a Mall Parking Lot On Staten Island for a Bus Ride to a Memorial Event in Lower Manhattan. In 2002, the Group Needed 15 Buses to Transport the Crowd. On Sunday, It Took Just One. The Ride Was Organized by Dennis Mckeon, Above, the Executive Director of Where to Turn. (Photographs by Alex Wroblewski for the New York Times)
Word count: 1118
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 12, 2016"
