"Fourteen people were killed and 22 others were injured in a shooting rampage during a holiday party in San Bernardino one year ago Friday, but many questions remain unanswered.
Despite extensive efforts, investigators still don't know exactly why a Redlands couple -- Syed Farook, 28, and Tashfeen Malik, 27 -- committed the attack at the Inland Regional Center on Dec. 2. Authorities believe they were radicalized by the Islamic State terrorist organization, but little information on their motive has been unearthed.
\"There are many theories as to why that location was chosen,\" FBI spokeswoman Laura Eimiller said. \"We may not ultimately ever know why, whether it was opportunistic, whether they specifically targeted that location, whether they even had a secondary location based on the amount of weaponry they had.\"
Farook and Malik wore dark military-style clothing and carried assault rifles, handguns and 1,600 rounds of ammunition. They also had a bag containing an explosive that they left behind that never detonated.
Law enforcement officials searched their Redlands home and found more than 6,000 rounds of ammunition. The couple also left behind a 6-month-old baby that is still being \"passed around from foster home to foster home,\" with Farook's sister trying to get custody of her, FBI Supervisory Agent Sid Patel from the Los Angeles office, which has led the investigation, said during a talk in Rancho Mirage earlier this week.
The pair never left the area and authorities say it's possible there were plans to return to the facility and activate the explosive.
Otherwise, nothing is known about their activities between the time of the killing and the shootout between police that left them both dead.
\"We don't know if they ever met with anyone,\" Eimiller said. \"We believe there's evidence we don't have.\"
Authorities haven't arrested anyone directly linked to the shooting, and it remains under investigation.
Illustration
photo Joe Raedle, Getty Images
Word count: 342
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
