"BETHLEHEM, West Bank -- Israeli officials named on Thursday the Palestinian who they say carried out a bus bombing in Jerusalem on Monday that rattled a country on edge after months of violence.
Even as the Israeli domestic intelligence agency identified Abdul-Hamid Abu Srour, 19, his family praised him for the act, and relatives distributed posters of the clean-shaven young man, praising him as a \"hero.\"
The bombing, in which nuts and bolts were packed into an explosive device, wounded more than a dozen people, including Mr. Abu Srour, who died of his injuries in an Israeli hospital on Wednesday, said his parents. One girl, 15, was badly burned.
The shattered, charred frame of the bus, the wailing sirens and the television interviews with survivors revived for many Israelis the memory of the second Palestinian uprising that erupted in 2000. Then, suicide bombers blew up buses in Jerusalem and other Israeli cities, killing scores. Attacks on buses have been rare in recent years.
It also reminded many Palestinians of the same era.
Some lauded Mr. Abu Srour as a young man who had taken a current, waning uprising dominated by stabbings to a new level of violence.
\"I'm proud that Aboud did this,\" said his mother, Azhar Abu Srour, referring to her son by his nickname. \"Aboud used to say, 'Either do something that's worth it, or nothing at all,\"' she said at her son's wake, where women sat on plastic chairs in a leafy courtyard.
\"We are a people who have been abandoned and nobody is defending us,\" she said, defending her son's act, and ticking off a list of attacks against Palestinians, including a July arson attack by Jewish extremists that killed a baby, and later his parents, in Duma, a West Bank village. \"They have left us no other way.\"
Videos uploaded to YouTube showed loud demonstrations of Palestinian youths in Bethlehem, cheering Mr. Abu Srour.
The bombings came as a six-month wave of stabbings, shootings and vehicle attacks by Palestinians appeared to have abated, but not before it had killed about 30 Israelis. Israeli forces killed more than 200 Palestinians during that period, according to the Palestinian Health Ministry.
Most of the Palestinians were killed while carrying out, or attempting, attacks. While individuals undertook most of the attacks, senior Israeli military officials have said in recent weeks that small cells of Palestinians are trying to undertake more organized, deadly assaults, including by making homemade bombs and guns.
Mr. Abu Srour apparently idolized a notorious Hamas bomb maker, Yahya Ayyash, who was assassinated by Israel in 1996. The teenager frequently posted images of Mr. Ayyash on Facebook, alongside other assassinated Hamas leaders, said his uncle, Humam Abu Srour.
Suggesting that Mr. Abu Srour was not acting alone, the Israeli domestic intelligence agency, known as the Shin Bet, said in a statement that other Hamas activists had been arrested a day after the attack.
\"They are suspected of involvement and participation in the planning and execution of the attack,\" said the statement
Hamas issued a terse news release on Wednesday, after Mr. Abu Srour was confirmed dead, acknowledging he had been a member of the militant Islamic group.
At the men's section of the wake, the family sought to connect Mr. Abu Srour to his extended clan, famed for its militant activities against Israel.
One of the banners showed Mr. Abu Srour's grandfather. He was also killed, in 1981 in Lebanon, during an Israeli bombing, the family said.
The banner showed their photographs side by side, one in black and white and the other in color.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
AuthorAffiliation
DIAA HADID Follow Diaa Hadid on Twitter @diaahadid
Credit: DIAA HADID; Rami Nazzal contributed reporting from Bethlehem, West Bank.
Word count: 656
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 22, 2016"
