"Six armed assailants attacked the Ivory Coast beach resort town of Grand-Bassam on Sunday, killing 14 civilians and two soldiers as panicked vacationers scrambled for cover, authorities said.
President Alassane Ouattara said the six attackers were killed by security forces.
The attackers targeted three hotels before being \"neutralized\" by security forces, the government-owned RTI radio said.
At least four Europeans were among the victims, Reuters reported. A local tour guide told the news website France24.com that he saw attackers shooting on the beach, which was packed with tourists.
\"A detailed assessment will be communicated in the coming hours, according to the Ministry of Interior and Security,\" RTI tweeted.
No group immediately claimed responsibility for the attack.
The U.S. Embassy said on Twitter that it was monitoring the situation. \"No evidence that U.S. citizens were targeted nor confirmed reports of any U.S citizens as harmed,\" the tweet said.
Resident Josiane Sekongo, 25, told the Associated Press that she heard the gunfire and saw people fleeing the beach. She said security forces had responded and that locals were hiding in their homes.
A witness told Agence FrancePresse that one of the attackers shouted \"Allahu akbar\" -- Arabic for \"God is great.\"
The assailants were heavily armed and shot guests at the L'Etoile du Sud, a large hotel, another witness told AFP.
Grand-Bassam, in southeastern Ivory Coast, sits about 25 miles east of the African nation's economic center of Abidjan. Grand-Bassam was the French colonial capital for a few years in the late 19th century. The current capital is Yamoussoukr, although most government institutions are centered in Abidjan.
In January, al-Qaeda fighters in neighboring Burkina Faso launched an assault on a hotel in that nation's capital, which killed at least 28 people from more than a dozen countries.
In November, Islamic militants killed 20 people in a mass shooting at a luxury hotel in Mali's capital of Bamako.
Credit: John Bacon, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Sia Kambou, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 358
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
