"PARIS -- Armed police surrounding Muslim women on beaches and ordering them to remove their modest clothes or leave. Calls from onlookers to \"go back to where you came from.\" Public humiliation and ostracism with echoes of the morals police of theocratic countries like Iran or Saudi Arabia, not a country that sees its values as a paragon of Western freedoms.
Those uncomfortable images have come to dominate the ongoing debate over identity and assimilation as France's coastal municipalities attempt to enforce new bans on the \"burkini,\" the full-body bathing suit designed to accommodate Islamic modesty codes.
On Wednesday, photographs flashed across the globe on social media of French police officers forcing modestly clad Muslim women on beaches to pay fines, leave or disrobe. A storm of criticism erupted, followed by some political backpedaling a week after the nation's prime minister, Manuel Valls, had denounced the little-worn burkini as a tool of \"enslavement.\"
At least 20 municipalities on the Mediterranean, as well as several in northern France, have enacted bans against the garment on the grounds that it is not \"appropriate,\" \"respectful of good morals and of secularism\" and \"respectful of the rules of hygiene and security of bathers on public beaches.\"
Organizations including the Collective Against Islamophobia in France and the League of Human Rights have challenged the restrictions in local courts, but so far the rules have been upheld.
Now that the bans, which are vaguely worded, have apparently hit not just women wearing burkinis but others in a wide range of modest clothing, some French organizations and politicians that previously had said little have begun to worry that the new rules are discriminatory and unenforceable.
Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve, who met with the French Council of the Muslim Faith after an urgent request from the organization, said that the enforcement should not \"stigmatize\" people or \"set one against another.\"
Mr. Valls's own Socialist Party said in a statement that the enforcement was putting the country in a \"particularly dangerous downward spiral,\" citing \"the attitude of the crowd\" that gathered around a woman being confronted by three officers in Cannes last week.
The officers surrounded the woman, who was wearing a tunic, leggings and a head scarf, fined her and ordered her to leave the beach. The woman was at the beach with her children, and said she was a third-generation French citizen from Toulouse.
A crowd gathered. \"I heard things I had never heard to my face,\" said the woman, who gave her name only as Siam to the French magazine L'Obs. \"Like, 'Go back to where you came from' 'Madame, the law is the law, we are fed up with this fuss,' and 'We are Catholic here.\"'
Tearfully, the woman said that \"because people of my religion have killed, I no longer have the right to go to the beach.\"
When female relatives with her asked the police why they were not hunting down people with crosses, if outward shows of religious faith were the target of the new law, a policeman responded: \"We are not going to hunt for crosses. Get going, madame. You are being told to leave the beach.\"
The exchange was noted by a reporter, Mathilde Cusin, a journalist for the television station France 4, who happened to be on the beach and who gave the account to L'Obs.
However, it was a series of photos of a similar episode in Nice that set off the social media firestorm. The photos showed four armed municipal police officers, wearing ballistic vests, approaching a woman wearing an informal turban, a large blue shirt and leggings.
The photos show them surrounding her and appearing to issue a citation and stand around as she took off her shirt. She was wearing a tank top under it. The pictures were circulated in the British newspaper The Daily Mail and later in The Guardian. Both publications said the police had told her to take off her shirt.
Since the photographer was some distance from the scene, it was unclear what the police actually said. However, the images suggested that the woman was purposely humiliated in front of other beachgoers.
In response, some Twitter users posted photos of nuns wading into the water wearing their habits and wondering whether the French police \"would make these ladies take their clothes off, too.\"
Such an affront to secularism! I bet they're indoctrinating kids. What weapons hide under their habits? Fine them! pic.twitter.com/a1Q4M2xGsu -- Kenneth Roth (@KenRoth) August 24, 2016
Others shared photos of a man wearing a wet suit and a woman wearing a burkini, noting that the wet suit was deemed appropriate by the French government.
If you agree we must enact a #BurkiniBan to keep us safe, then you'll agree that wetsuits definitely #MustBeBanned. pic.twitter.com/YlNXROj6au -- Simran Jeet Singh (@SikhProf) August 24, 2016
The United Nations also criticized France over the apparent treatment of Muslim women in the social media photos. Asked about the restriction at a daily news briefing, Stéphane Dujarric, a spokesman for Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, said: \"I think it's important that the dignity of individuals be respected. I'm not sure in this particular case, in these photos, that it was.\"
Even one feminist group, Osez Les Feminisme, spoke out against the anti-burkini enforcement, saying that the women were victims twice over: of racism and sexism.
Many French feminists have taken the position that wearing a veil or other Muslim dress oppresses women and have backed limitations on wearing such attire in public.
But in this instance, Osez Les Feminisme said, the women were not only potentially being deprived of their rights by their \"patriarchal\" religion, but the French government was also forcing them \"to live under religious oppression\" and contradicting \"their fundamental liberties.\"
Aheda Zanetti, the Lebanese-Australian designer who first marketed the burkini in 2004, said officials who sought to prevent women from covering up had misconstrued the purpose of the swimsuit, which allowed modest women to swim and participate in sports more comfortably.
\"They've misunderstood the burkini swimsuit,\" Ms. Zanetti, 49, said in a telephone interview from Sydney. \"Because the burkini swimsuit is freedom and happiness and lifestyle changes -- you can't take that away from a Muslim, or any other woman, that chooses to wear it.\"
However, former President Nicolas Sarkozy, who is vying to be the center-right candidate in the 2017 French presidential elections, told Le Figaro Magazine that \"doing nothing\" against the burkini would be \"another retreat\" for France.
He urged that the ban on religious clothing and symbols in government jobs and at French public elementary and secondary schools be expanded to universities and private companies. The full face veil and burqa are already banned in public places.
Christian Estrosi, deputy mayor of Nice, backed the behavior of the police, saying that they had issued 24 fines for violations of the city's ban on \"inappropriate clothing\" and that he saw women wearing such clothes as purposely trying to provoke the public.
\"I condemn these unacceptable provocations in the very particular context that our city is familiar with,\" Mr. Estrosi said, referring to the terrorist attack on July 14 that killed 86 people, 30 of whom were Muslims.
The vice president of the League of Human Rights in Cannes, Henri Rossi, agreed that the context of the recent attack in Nice was important for understanding why people were so sensitive, but said that hardly justified taking measures that worsened the widening chasm between France's Muslims and non-Muslims.
\"There was a trauma on July 14,\" he said. \"This trauma has not been cured; the convalescence has not yet begun. And this trauma has spawned movements of hate on the part of certain people, unimaginable.
\"This has put in motion a machine of horror, hatred and fear, each of these sentiments nourishes the other,\" he said. \"On top of this, instead of calming people's emotions, the mayors put in place these bans that are doing more to stigmatize and are going to exacerbate the fear and the hatred.\"
Credit: ALISSA J. RUBIN; Aurelien Breeden contributed reporting.
Photograph
Police Officers Surrounded a Woman in a Burkini On Tuesday On a Beach in Nice, France. (Photograph by Bestimage) (A1); a Woman in a Burkini, a Full-Body Bathing Suit Designed to Meet Islamic Modesty Codes, in Marseille, France, Last Week. (Photograph by Dmitry Kostyukov for the New York Times) (A7)
Word count: 1414
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 25, 2016"
