"The United States and allied forces have the Islamic State on the defensive, President Obama said Wednesday, with the terrorist group failing to mount a single offensive operation in Syria or Iraq since last summer.
\"We have momentum, and we intend to keep that momentum,\" Obama said. \"It's harder than ever for them to move, and for them to amass forces.\"
In remarks after meeting with his National Security Council at the CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., on Wednesday, Obama hinted at no changes in U.S. strategy, saying the current military, intelligence and diplomatic efforts are depriving the Islamic State of fighters, money and leadership. He also said the ultimate solution has to be a diplomatic one.
The Pentagon said Wednesday it killed three of the Islamic State's top commanders in Syria and Iraq recently as part of a bigger airstrike campaign that has won back more than 40% of the caliphate's territory in Iraq, while fighting threatens to engulf the Syrian city of Aleppo.
In Geneva, indirect Syrian peace talks resumed Wednesday. The recent fighting, however, threatens the partial cease-fire agreement, Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said Wednesday on Twitter.
Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad told the Associated Press that the opposition participating in the talks should let go of its dream that President Bashar Assad would leave power in a transitional government. Such a move would be a coup d'etat and \"will never be accepted,\" Mekdad said.
The Defense Department said the U.S.-led coalition has retaken control of 15% of the Syrian territory held by Islamic State.
U.S.-led airstrikes have killed three top Islamic State commanders in recent months -- the group's minister of war, chief finance officer and chief weapons officer, Col. Steve Warren, spokesman for the U.S. military operation against the Islamic State, said Wednesday.
The air campaign forced the group to scatter and took away its capacity to meet and produce income, he said. U.S. monitors report a rise in the number of Islamic State executing its own as suspected spies, a signal of increased confusion, he said.
Credit: Gregory Korte, and Oren Dorell, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 387
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
