"The first responsibility of any government is to protect its people. In recent years, we have engaged in a discussion about the use and effectiveness of \"enhanced interrogation techniques.\" These techniques came into the social discourse after the events of 9/11 and the capture of enemy combatants and terrorists. Depending on the source, these techniques allowed officials to glean significant information about operations hostile to the United States. However, there has also been significant pushback against what some have called torture. I am running for president and feel it is important for the American people to know exactly how I feel about this important topic.
The president of the United States is the commander in chief of our forces and has the ultimate responsibility when it comes to the conduct of American officials gathering intelligence about potential actions harmful to this country. I have made it clear in my campaign that I would support and endorse the use of enhanced interrogation techniques if the use of these methods would enhance the protection and safety of the nation. Though the effectiveness of many of these methods may be in dispute, nothing should be taken off the table when American lives are at stake. The enemy is cutting off the heads of Christians and drowning them in cages, and yet we are too politically correct to respond in kind.
All presidents are faced with difficult decisions, and I am sure the decision to use enhanced interrogation techniques would be one that would weigh heavily on whoever holds the highest office in the land. The people of the United States expect their president to make such decisions, and I will not disappoint them. I will do whatever it takes to protect and defend this nation and its people.
I cannot imagine knowing that something could have been done to save American lives and then not taking those actions. Ultimately, the president must live with those decisions, and I know that the American people would expect me to act with intention, will and courage on their behalf. With their support, we will make America great again.
Donald J. Trump is a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination.
Word count: 378
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
