"Summer unofficially ends on a Monday that is meant to glorify organized labor, but in New York, the day's festivities focus more on celebrating West Indian heritage. Unionized workers unwilling to interrupt the holiday weekend for a parade will stage their own march five days later, which will be followed by the third of September's tributes, the anniversary of 9/11.
Most New Yorkers have yet to visit the National September 11 Memorial Museum in Lower Manhattan. After all, they lived through the horrific terrorist attack 15 years ago. Now, New Yorkers and out-of-towners alike are able to take an armchair tour of the museum with \"No Day Shall Erase You: The Story of 9/11 as Told at the National September 11 Memorial Museum\" (Skira Rizzoli, $45).
This official, coffee-table-format book makes the museum's unique mission and evocative location more accessible. Edited by Alice M. Greenwald, the museum's director, it tastefully and candidly presents highlights from the collection and explores the challenges in curating it.
It is arguable whether a quotation from \"The Aeneid\" by Virgil, \"No day shall erase you from the memory of time\" (also an inscription at the memorial), makes sense as the book's title, as the poet was referring to two brutally slain Trojan warriors, while the memorial inscription is on a wall that protects a repository of 8,000 unidentified remains. That said, the book persuasively explains how the museum became both a burial ground and a place of contemplation, commemoration and historical remembrance \"at the same time and in the same space.\"
It is both a memorial and a celebration of survival, courage, endurance and resilience, made all the more poignant because, unlike so many other museums, it is site specific. Like visitors to Pearl Harbor, where sailors are still entombed and where oil still bubbles to the surface from the submerged battleship that is part of the U.S.S. Arizona Memorial, people at the museum can stand at ground zero, where the terrorist attack took place. Even readers, while paging through this book, can feel themselves inescapably transplanted there.
Because the museum is at \"the nexus of the void, at a site of memory,\" Ms. Greenwald writes, \"we knew from the start that this placement would intensify our visitors' encounter with authenticity.\"
Readers are reminded of the missing-persons posters; the Lady Liberty statue festooned with memorials that stood outside a firehouse in Midtown Manhattan; Milton Glaser's \"I love NY More Than Ever\" poster; the red bandanna worn by Welles Remy Crowther, a 24-year-old equities trader and volunteer firefighter who directed fellow office workers to safety but died himself; the photograph of the plume of smoke wafting from the site as seen from space; a $2 bill that Robert Joseph Gschaar, an insurance underwriter who vanished while working at the south tower, gave his wife when he proposed; and the image of the Rev. Mychal F. Judge, a Fire Department chaplain, being carried away after giving last rites to others.
Also pictured is a meteroite-like mass of building elements and other components fused by the pressure of the collapsing towers that \"concretizes the unknowable.\"
Many items are photographed (and displayed at the museum) in the states in which they were found. \"In the context of artifacts salvaged from ground zero, the dust encrusted on them is comparable to a passport stamp, attesting to their journey through 9/11's torment,\" Jan Seidler Ramirez, senior vice president for collections and the chief curator, writes. \"As collection curators, conservators and exhibit planners, our obligation is to safeguard, not sanitize, that evidence of woe.\"
>
The \"after\" story is glowingly recounted in \"One World Trade Center: Biography of the Building\" (Little, Brown and Co., $35) by Judith Dupré, the author of \"Skyscrapers.\" This fact-filled and profusely illustrated book embraces the demanding expectations for the site, the political, security and engineering challenges in replacing the original towers, and the resulting spire, which, the author concludes, \"cloaks its audacity behind an elegant facade\" while the building as a whole \"encourages individual engagement.\"
Photograph
Tridents On Display at the Sept. 11 Museum. (Photograph by Jin Lee, Via 9/11 Memorial)
Word count: 704
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 4, 2016"
