"Syrian government forces backed Sunday by Shiite militias and Russian airstrikes recaptured the ancient city of Palmyra from Islamic State militants, Syrian officials said.
Antiquities experts already were developing strategies for rehabilitating iconic ruins severely damaged by the militants who swept into the city last May.
The rout followed a three-week siege that left hundreds of militants dead and sent many more fleeing into the desert, the army said. It follows a string of military setbacks for the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, in its efforts to create a Sunni-based caliphate.
\"Palmyra city is now fully cleared of ISIS terrorists after the army established complete control over all its parts,\" the army said in a statement through the government-controlled Syrian Arab News Agency.
The British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights confirmed Syrian army gains, saying government forces and Shiite militias also were taking control of neighborhoods on the outskirts of the site known as \"the bride of the Syrian desert.\"
The struggle against Islamic State fighters continues in Syria while a cease-fire between U.S.-backed rebels and army forces loyal to Syrian President Bashar Assad continued to hold.
The Pentagon did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the Palmyra reports, which provided political capital for Assad and for Moscow, pressing their cases as leaders in the war on terror.
Assad said the victory showed his army's efforts were more effective than that of the U.S.-led coalition.
Rebel leaders dismissed Assad's assertions. \"The government wants to win the favor of Western nations by fighting against terrorism, while obscuring its responsibility as providing the reasons for the spread of terror,\" Khaled Nasser, a member of the opposition coalition, told the Associated Press.
Hours before Assad's claim of victory, Russia said it had flown 40 airstrikes in the area in a 24-hour period.
The Islamic State took control of the city last spring and destroyed monuments dating back thousands of years, including the prized Arch of Triumph.
Credit: John Bacon and Steph Solis, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo european pressphoto agency
Word count: 372
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
