"Mayor Bill de Blasio strode along West 23rd Street on Tuesday, amid a phalanx of suits and uniforms, past the buildings and shops with windows shattered by a terrorist's bomb in Manhattan.
He spoke with the Homeland Security secretary, Jeh Johnson, placing his hand on his back; praised police officers; visited with tenants at a residence for the blind who were playing bingo before the blast rocked their building; and chatted with customers at a diner up the block -- his every move recorded by the assembled press corps.
Mr. de Blasio has won praise for his calm handling of the bombing on Saturday, in which, federal prosecutors said, 31 people were injured. He has been cool under pressure, measured in his remarks, encouraging and reassuring.
But the mayor's visit to the Chelsea neighborhood, his second in three days, also offered him an opportunity to illustrate a guiding philosophy of his mayoralty: Demonstrating leadership in times of crisis -- combined with a focus on signature accomplishments -- will transcend the constant barrage of minor crises and political sideshows that buffet every administration.
\"I actually think some of his best moments as mayor have been in moments of crisis,\" said Councilman Corey Johnson, a Democrat whose district includes Chelsea, where the bombing occurred. \"He's good at communicating real-time information in a calm and measured manner.\"
Mr. de Blasio has, for the most part, picked the right moments to rise above the fray, Mr. Johnson said, citing the mayor's handling of the Ebola scare in 2014 and even his response to blizzards, in which he showed his ability to communicate with the public though there was some criticism of spotty snow removal.
The mayor, a Democrat, has had his share of stumbles and political sideshows, often of his own making. They included a recent nasty public spat with a city councilman who held sway over an important housing vote; court battles over his administration's lack of transparency; and the lifting of a deed restriction that allowed a nursing home to be sold to luxury condominium developers.
And there is still a possible game-changing development: continuing state and federal investigations into his administration's fund-raising activities, focusing on whether he or other city officials improperly used their positions to benefit donors.
But for the mayor, the bombing provided a crucial test of leadership at an important moment. His missteps have fed speculation that he might face a serious challenge in his re-election campaign next year, even in the Democratic primary -- and his strong performance may, at the least, give potential rivals further reason to hesitate.
The mayor toured the bombing site almost immediately after it was deemed safe, resisted calls to label the attack an act of terrorism before more was known, and backed a decision by the Police Department and emergency management officials to send a first-of-its-kind digital \"wanted\" message to cellphones across New York City.
His response to the crisis, as well as how it was received, contrasted with the atmosphere toward the end of his first year in office, when two police officers were fatally shot by a deranged man angered over the killing of black men by officers around the country. Officers revolted, turning their backs on Mr. de Blasio in pointed displays of no confidence.
The bombing on Saturday in many ways presented a less fraught challenge for Mr. de Blasio. He and his police force were on the same side of the crisis. No one died in the bombing. Investigators arrested the suspect, Ahmad Khan Rahami, with stunning rapidity.
\"He got his Rudy Giuliani moment,\" said Doug Muzzio, a professor of political science at Baruch College. \"I thought he was responsible; he stated the facts as he knew them. He kept the city informed.\" But, Professor Muzzio added, the mayor's handling of the attack was unlikely to convince skeptical voters of his management skills. \"It's so minor that it's not going to significantly affect him either way,\" he said.
Phil Walzak, a top aide to the mayor, described a \"two-track approach\" aimed at keeping focus on the administration's core mission of increasing equity and fairness for New Yorkers, while dealing with unforeseen crises, large and small.
\"When these inevitable incidents occur, as they have for every single mayor, the imperative is on addressing them in a way that really squares with the mayor's values,\" Mr. Walzak said in an interview before the bombing.
That appeared to be at least part of the mayor's calculation on Sunday in refusing to describe the bombing as an act of terrorism. He did so on Monday, after Mr. Rahami's capture. The issue vanished almost immediately.
But others are quite likely to continue after attention to the bombing has shifted. If the mayor's challenge will be to maintain the momentum, he faces a potentially difficult task: headwinds in the City Council to his affordable housing plan, the still-open state and federal investigations, and a bitter rivalry with Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a fellow Democrat, that has not dissipated despite the two men's embrace Sunday at the scene of the bombing. (They held separate news conferences.)
Indeed, in the days before the attack, perhaps the most significant police-involved death under his mayoralty -- the killing of Eric Garner, an unarmed man, in 2014 -- re-emerged as a troubling and potentially divisive issue.
It was disclosed last week that Daniel Pantaleo, the officer who applied the fatal chokehold to Mr. Garner, had received significant overtime pay while on modified duty, a disclosure that has rankled police reform advocates.
\"It could be injurious by a thousand cuts,\" Assemblyman Keith L. T. Wright, a Democrat from Harlem, said of issues like the Pantaleo overtime and questions about policing strategies, which could undermine the mayor's support, especially among black residents of the city. \"It creates terrible optics, and the responsibility falls upon the mayor.\"
Two days before the bombing, Mr. de Blasio sought to retake control of his message with the announcement of a new agenda item: legislation to require fast-food restaurants to post worker schedules two weeks in advance, with extra pay for last-minute changes.
The effort is part of the slowly emerging contours of his re-election campaign theme, one that he acknowledged would come into focus after the general election in November.
\"It's going to be about how we take further steps to end the tale of two cities,\" he said last week. \"There's no question that mission continues.\"
Indeed, it did not take long for normalcy to resume. After two days of devoting his Twitter account to the bombing, Mr. de Blasio ended that string with a post about his fair workweek initiative. By Wednesday, even the middling controversies that have dogged his tenure began to return: \"De Blasio delays visit to Chelsea bombing site to work out,\" a headline in The New York Post read.
Photograph
Mayor Bill de Blasio Met with Customers at Malibu Diner in Chelsea On Tuesday, Three Days After an Attack in the Neighborhood. (Photograph by ÁNgel Franco/the New York Times)
Word count: 1192
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 22, 2016"
