"SYDNEY, Australia -- An Australian who had recruited for the Islamic State in the Middle East and urged fellow Australians to commit terrorist attacks at home has been killed in an American airstrike in Iraq, officials said on Thursday.
Neil Prakash, whom the attorney general, George Brandis, called the most dangerous Australian involved with the extremist group, was killed in the city of Mosul on April 29, Mr. Brandis said.
Mr. Prakash had \"appeared in ISIL propaganda videos and magazines and has actively recruited Australian men, women and children, and encouraged acts of terrorism,\" Mr. Brandis said in a statement, using an alternate term for the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS.
About 110 Australians overseas are believed to be fighting for the Islamic State or actively supporting the group, according to the Australian government, which is part of the United States-led effort to fight the extremists. Mr. Prakash left Australia in 2013 and had been based mostly in the Syrian city of Raqqa, officials said.
Australian officials have linked Mr. Prakash, who also used the name Abu Khaled al-Cambodi, to a number of failed terrorist plots here, including a purported plan to attack police officers in April 2015 during celebrations for the Anzac Day holiday, which honors Australian and New Zealand veterans of World War I.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said in an interview with Sky News that Mr. Prakash \"has been a target for some time, as he should have been.\"
Mr. Brandis said another Australian, Shadi Jabar Khalil Mohammad, and her Sudanese husband, Abu Sa'ad al-Sudani, had been killed in a separate United States airstrike near Al Bab, Syria, on April 22. Both recruited foreign fighters for the Islamic State, Mr. Brandis said.
Ms. Mohammad was the sister of Farhad Mohammad, 15, an Australian boy who shot and killed a civilian police employee, Curtis Cheng, outside a police station in suburban Sydney in October. The boy was then shot dead by police.
Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.
AuthorAffiliation
MICHELLE INNIS Follow Michelle Innis on Twitter @MichelleInnis .
Word count: 384
Copyright New York Times Company May 6, 2016"
