"In 1983, guerrilla fighters from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia murdered Alberto Uribe in a botched kidnapping attempt. Two decades later, Alberto Uribe's son, Álvaro, would serve as Colombia's president, from 2002-10, leading the government in a civil war against the rebel group he held responsible for his father's death.
Álvaro Uribe's merciless kill-or-capture campaign weakened the guerrillas, known as the FARC, enough to force negotiations. Talks began in 2012 under Mr. Uribe's successor, President Juan Manuel Santos. Last week the Colombian government and the FARC announced a peace agreement to end what was one of the world's longest armed conflicts.
Mr. Santos said the agreement will be put to a public referendum on Oct. 2. Mr. Uribe, now a popular senator, is one of the accord's most prominent critics.
The opponents of the deal must be resisted. A nod in favor of the peace initiative from Colombian voters would end an era of death and suffering that took some 220,000 lives and uprooted more than five million people over 52 years.
The United States and Cuba deserve some credit for throwing diplomatic weight behind the negotiations. The success of the talks shows all of Latin America that Washington and Havana can work together on a major regional issue. Voter approval of the deal would allow President Obama to leave office having renewed the United States's reputation as a good neighbor across Latin America and the Caribbean.
But significant obstacles remain, and the disapproval of Mr. Uribe and his many unforgiving followers is only one of them. President Obama should keep his thumb on the scales for peace.
The demobilization of nearly 7,000 heavily armed militants will be a major challenge. The FARC combatants would be required to surrender their weapons to the United Nations, rather than bury them in the jungles for future use.
Another critical challenge for the government will be ensuring the safety of the demobilized FARC guerrillas. Despite the horrific damage the FARC has caused to Colombian society, the government must prevent vigilante justice against the group's members.
Most Colombians have been affected by the war, and many are openly critical of what they see as amnesty for heinous crimes committed by the FARC. Polling ahead of the October referendum is fluctuating wildly. Recent surveys reflect a divided population with approximately one-third of eligible voters leaning toward supporting the accord, one-third against, and another third undecided.
Under the terms of the agreement, which follows a model established by the 2006 demobilization of a vicious right-wing paramilitary group, the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, known as the A.U.C., the FARC guerrillas would participate in a transitional justice process.
By relinquishing their arms and confessing to their crimes in public hearings, in which government prosecutors and victims would have the opportunity to ask questions and to challenge the statements given by FARC members, the rebels would avoid lengthy prison sentences. Those who committed serious crimes like murder and kidnapping would be sentenced to five to eight years of restricted freedom and community service. Lesser crimes like drug trafficking would be forgiven.
Mr. Santos has insisted that there would be no immunity for the worst FARC offenders. Guerrillas who fail to admit their crimes could be prosecuted and given prison sentences of up to 20 years. FARC members who return to active combat or drug trafficking could ultimately face their worst fear: extradition to the United States.
Washington's Plan Colombia, which began in 2000 and has been rebranded several times, has effectively conditioned United States military and diplomatic aid on the extradition of some FARC members and drug-cartel kingpins. Many FARC combatants have been indicted in the United States for murder, kidnapping, terrorism and drug trafficking.
The threat of extradition is a powerful cudgel for the Colombian government: Convictions in the United States result in harsh sentences in maximum security prisons where FARC members are cut off from their comrades and exercise no influence or power.
The largest challenge the government will face is incorporating back into society the former guerrillas, the vast majority of whom are illiterate and lack basic job skills. The government will establish and fund reintegration programs in which ex-combatants will be encouraged to enroll in schools and workshops to learn the basics of living in a peaceful society.
The United States and Colombia announced early this year a program -- called Peace Colombia -- to provide a framework for reinforcing recent improvements in security, reintegrating former combatants into society and promoting the rule of law and democracy. Peace Colombia, like Plan Colombia, will require ongoing funding from the United States Congress. It is well worth the investment.
Nobody should begrudge Mr. Uribe for refusing to forgive the criminals he holds accountable for the murder of his father and for causing irreparable damage to Colombia. During my service in the country, I worked closely with Mr. Uribe and with Mr. Santos, who was then the minister of defense, by seeking to extradite high-ranking FARC leaders to the United States. I was committed to the destruction of the group and to seeking justice for the millions of displaced victims and their families.
This was not my war, and I am not a victim, but I believe this peace agreement deserves support. Colombians cannot ignore the statement by Constanza Turbay, an advocate of the peace agreement whose family was killed by the FARC: \"If we who have been directly affected by violence can take this step and have this encounter, why can't the rest of the country? Why can't the rest of the country forgive?\"
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
AuthorAffiliation
PETER VINCENT Peter Vincent, a lawyer who specializes in national security, counterterrorism and extradition, was a Department of Justice attaché to Colombia from 2006 to 2009.
Word count: 998
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 29, 2016"
