"WASHINGTON -- A week of violence and anguish in the United States has prompted increasingly familiar discussions of race, policing, discrimination and gun violence. But amid those very real issues, another force is playing out, unseen and little discussed beyond the social scientists who study it.
Their work, formally known as intergroup threat theory, does not address the origins of this violence. But it does explain how the killings are experienced by millions of people who were not at the scene yet nonetheless felt directly affected by them.
When a social group perceives a threat, according to this theory, its members tend to shift how they see themselves, one another and, especially, outsiders.
Researchers who study this phenomenon, which plays out in ways as varied as European soccer hooliganism and sectarianism in the Middle East, say it sheds light on how these group dynamics form -- and why they can be so powerful.
How threats strengthen group identity
It begins when members of a social group perceive a threat to themselves because of their membership in that group, or to the group itself. Whether the threat is violence or changes to the group's social or economic status, it can affect members' behavior.
\"We survive because we are social animals,\" said John Dovidio, the director of the Intergroup Relations Lab at Yale University. \"And when we are threatened, we close ranks with people who we feel similar to.\"
Generally, researchers have found little connection between \"in-group love\" and \"out-group hate\" -- meaning that people can feel very positively toward members of their own group without necessarily being prejudiced against outsiders.
Threats deepen internal group identity and cohesion. For instance, high-profile incidents in which police officers shoot black men have made black Americans particularly aware of the ways that police violence endangers their communities, which in turn has contributed to the rise of movements such as Black Lives Matter.
This likewise helps explain why some police unions -- also a group with a social identity -- have closed ranks in response to protests against police violence and attacks on officers like last week's in Dallas and the killing of two New York City police officers in 2014.
Threats can also heighten \"out-group hate.\"
Kimberly Rios, a professor of psychology at Ohio University, said that when members of one group feel threatened by another, their prejudice against that other group increases.
One study of American university students, for instance, found that white students who felt more threatened by black people were also more likely to be racially biased against them. The same was true of black students who felt threatened by white people, though the effect was not as strong -- perhaps because whites, as the traditionally dominant ethnic group, felt that they had more to lose.
\"When identification with a group is coupled with perceptions of threat, that's a particularly dangerous combination,\" Professor Rios said. \"That's when you start to see a lot of biases, and a lot of negative feelings.\"
That's true even if the sense of threat is irrational. Even if facts show that there is no real danger, \"it's the perception of threat from an out-group, regardless of the actual presence of threat, that predicts prejudice,\" she said.
When group identification is visceral
Research on this phenomenon has found something else that's crucial for understanding the significance of recent events. When people see others in their social group subjected to harm because of their membership in that group, they don't just sympathize with that suffering -- they feel as if it had happened to them, as well.
\"Your identities are glued together by that group membership,\" Professor Dovidio said. \"So now, what happens to you is more important to me than it ordinarily would be, and it's also more threatening to me. It's more like an event that has directly happened to me.\"
For many black Americans, then, the fatal shootings by police officers last week of Alton B. Sterling and Philando Castile were not just sad or frightening; they also caused real psychological trauma.
A sniper's killing of five police officers in Dallas risks similar pain for members of law enforcement who feel they were targeted as a group.
\"What happens to one police officer anywhere in the United States will be felt very strongly by other police officers,\" said Professor Dovidio, who has consulted for police departments.
Why perceptions matter
When members of one social group feel it is under threat from another group, researchers say, this can heighten cognitive biases that distort how that other group is perceived. That risks deepening social divisions and even, in extreme cases, escalating isolated episodes into conflict between groups.
This is driven in part by a phenomenon that psychologists refer to as the \"ultimate attribution error,\" in which people attribute another group's positive actions to random chance or circumstance but assume that negative actions reflect the group's core nature.
That pattern plays out repeatedly in clashes that deal with group identity, as in Northern Ireland and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in which one side perceives even a lone attacker as representing his or her group as a whole.
That may help explain why the National Association of Police Organizations, a law enforcement lobbying group, issued a statement last week implying that Black Lives Matter was directly responsible for the deaths of the Dallas police officers. In fact, Black Lives Matter is a nonviolent protest movement. And although the Dallas sniper apparently told law enforcement officials that he was \"upset about\" Black Lives Matter, there is no evidence that he was affiliated with it.
In some places, extremists have exploited this to undermine efforts at peace: Attribution error leads to an entire social group being blamed for the actions of a few radical members or supporters.
Group threats can also drive another type of cognitive error: \"infrahumanization,\" in which people perceive members of other groups as less capable of human emotion than members of their own group.
People who feel threatened by intergroup violence can come to see members of an opposing group as capable of experiencing only primitive feelings such as anger and happiness, but not more sophisticated emotions like sorrow, guilt and nostalgia.
\"Sorrow is a uniquely human emotion,\" Professor Dovidio said. \"So we can understand the sorrow of our group, but we tend to think that the other group is incapable of that -- that they won't feel the same sense of loss if their child is killed. And once you dehumanize them, it's easier to justify violence.\"
In its most extreme incarnation, this fallacy can help enable mass atrocities. For example, in Rwanda, escalating fear and distrust between ethnic groups culminated in some ethnic Hutus' labeling Tutsis as \"cockroaches,\" helping pave the way for the 1994 genocide.
That dynamic may also help explain why the Islamic State, a Sunni terrorist group, sent a minivan filled with explosives into a crowded market in a Shiite neighborhood of Baghdad last week, killing about 300 people.
Milder expressions of this fallacy, even if they do little more than exacerbate existing social tensions, can still be dangerous.
The officer's shooting of Mr. Castile in Minnesota may demonstrate the stakes of such errors: Mr. Castile's girlfriend said the bullets had come as he reached for his wallet -- after telling the officer that he had a gun in the car.
\"This is what the research shows; people will actually misperceive things because of their bias and feeling of threat,\" Professor Dovidio said. \"And even if it's just a small number of times that they make an error, the errors are so serious.\"
Photograph
Demonstrators in St. Paul Protesting the Police Shooting of Philando Castile Last Week. (Photograph by Joshua Lott for the New York Times)
Word count: 1314
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 13, 2016"
