"PARIS -- The Paris prosecutor identified on Thursday a Belgian-Moroccan man as one of the previously unidentified jihadists involved in the terror attacks in Paris and its suburbs in November.
The militant was identified as Chakib Akrouh by the prosecutor, who said he had been the third person who shot and killed patrons at cafes and bars in Paris on the evening of Nov. 13, the night in which 130 people were killed in three coordinated attacks in and around the city.
Mr. Akrouh, 25, blew himself up in an apartment on Rue Corbillon in St.-Denis during a police raid five days later, the office of Paris prosecutor François Molins said in a statement.
Mr. Akrouh had Belgium and Moroccan nationality. He was identified by matching his DNA with that of his mother, the prosecutor's office said.
The identification of Mr. Akrouh reduces to two the number of unidentified figures involved in the attacks; both of them were among the three suicide bombers at the Stade de France in the north of Paris. The one who has been identified is Bilal Hadfi. The other two were registered as having entered Europe through Greece carrying Syrian documents that were not believed to have been their own.
Mr. Molins has now identified all three gunmen at the cafes and bars, where 39 people were killed. The two who had previously been identified were Ibrahim Abdeslam, who blew himself up, according to the prosecutor, and Abdelhamid Abaaoud, believed to have been the on-the-ground organizer of the attacks. Mr. Abaaoud died in the Nov. 18 police raid on the hide-out in St.-Denis.
Like the majority of the attackers, Mr. Akrouh had ties to Morocco. The others had Belgian-Moroccan or French-Moroccan backgrounds. Reports in the Belgian news media said Mr. Akrouh went to Syria and was sentenced to five years in absentia last summer in the same court case in which Mr. Abaaoud was sentenced to 20 years in prison for recruiting for the Islamic State.
Mr. Akrouh came from Molenbeek, a suburb of Brussels where the Abdeslam brothers, who were also involved in the Paris attacks, lived. He appears to have known Mr. Abaaoud, perhaps from there.
His image was captured in a Paris Métro station with Mr. Abaaoud on the night of Nov. 13, when the two returned to the area near the Bataclan concert hall, where some of the other assailants were still shooting and killing civilians.
Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.
Word count: 442
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 15, 2016"
