"Ahmad Khan Rahami, the lone suspect in the weekend bombing campaign in New York and New Jersey, was formally charged late Tuesday with four federal counts, including the use of a weapon of mass destruction.
The charges, which also included the alleged bombing of a public place, assert that the 28-year-old naturalized U.S. citizen from Afghanistan intended to \"cause death and serious bodily injury\" when he planted devices at locations in New Jersey and New York, including the Chelsea neighborhood where one of the powerful bombs detonated Saturday night, injuring 31 people.
The Chelsea explosion, prosecutors charge, left a wide swath of wreckage across a 650-foot crime scene, and in addition to the injuries caused damage in excess of \"multiple millions of dollars.\"
\"The blast shattered windows as far as approximately 400 feet from the detonation site and, vertically, more than three stories high,\" according to court documents.
Prosecutors asserted that the pressure-cooker device was \"packed with ball bearings and steel nuts, hundreds of which were recovered from the blast site.\"
Rahami surfaced on the FBI's radar about two years ago when Rahami's father allegedly referred to his son as a terrorist, federal law enforcement officials told USA TODAY on Tuesday.
Federal investigators also are seeking to question Rahami's wife, who recently left the country to visit relatives in Pakistan, according to the officials, who were not authorized to comment publicly. The wife's travel, while of interest, did not immediately appear to be related or timed to Rahami's alleged bombing campaign over the weekend in the New York area, they said.
Authorities arrested Rahami on Monday following a shootout with police in nearby Linden and charged him with multiple counts of possessing a weapon without a permit and attempting to use it to kill the officers who apprehended him.
Mohammad Rahami, his father, made the terrorist claim during a domestic quarrel in which Ahmad Rahami was allegedly brandishing a knife in a confrontation with a brother, according to the official. During the incident, the official said, a neighbor heard Mohammad Rahami order his son out of the house, calling him a terrorist.
Local police were called and, as part of the investigation, the neighbor's statement was passed to the FBI as part of the bureau's \"guardian\" program, which pursues tips from the public about possible terror activity.
The official said the FBI reviewed Ahmad Rahami's prior activity and interviewed the father twice. The father told agents, according to the official, that he made the terrorist claim out of anger, though he did express concerns about Rahami's choice of friends.
The matter was closed when authorities found nothing to support any terrorist ties involving Rahami, who had been arrested related to the suspected domestic assault, the officials said.
The FBI's review did not trigger his placement on a government watch list because information gathered by authorities at the time found nothing to support such a placement, a second federal official told USA TODAY.
One of the federal officials told USA TODAY that a rambling note was allegedly found with Rahami when he was arrested.
The note, the official said, made references to the 2009 mass shooting at Fort Hood, Texas, where 13 people were killed after Army Maj. Nidal Hasan opened fire on colleagues.
Johnson writes for USA TODAY; Zehawi and Wyrich for The (Bergen County, N.J.) Record. Contributing: John Bacon, USA TODAY; Jeff Pillets, The (Bergen County, N.J.) Record
Illustration
photo UNION COUNTY PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE via EPA
Word count: 612
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
