"The police on Monday arrested and charged a man in connection with a powerful explosion in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan on Saturday night and the discovery of other explosive devices in the region.
The man, Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28, was taken into custody following reports of an \"active shooter\" situation in Linden, N.J., 15 miles from New York City.
Here's what else we know:
Who is Ahmad Khan Rahami?
Mr. Rahami, who previously served time in jail, was born in Afghanistan but is a United States citizen. He lived above the fried chicken restaurant in Elizabeth, N.J., started by his father, Mohammad, and also worked there.
Some of his friends called him Mad -- apparently a reference to his first name, not his demeanor -- and he was known for an obsession with souped-up Honda Civics that he liked to race.
After the bombing, the authorities sent what's being called an unprecedented cellphone alert to area residents, warning of the manhunt for a suspect. Mr. Rahami was found asleep in a doorway of a bar in New Jersey on Monday, and the police were called.
After a gunfight with officers, during which he was shot multiple times -- including in the leg and shoulder -- he was taken into custody and treated at University Hospital in Newark. An officer was hit in his vest in the area of his abdomen, officials said, and at least one other officer was hurt.
Mr. Rahami was charged with seven counts, including five counts of attempted murder of a law enforcement officer. His bail was set at $5.2 million.
What was the motive for the bombing?
That is still unknown. There is little information about Mr. Rahami's ideology or politics, or whether he has any connections to foreign terrorist organizations.
Some patrons of the family's restaurant said he disappeared around four years ago, possibly leaving for Afghanistan, and described striking changes in his personality upon his return. They said he became more stern, grew a beard, began wearing traditional Muslim robes and started praying in the back of the restaurant.
His family has had a fractious relationship with the police and neighbors, who complained about the noise and late hours of the restaurant. His father has sued the mayor, the Council and about 20 police officers, alleging discrimination.
How many people were injured in the explosion?
Twenty-nine people were injured, one seriously, by the blast around 8:30 Saturday night in Chelsea. By Sunday morning, all of those who had been admitted to hospitals had been released.
An explosion near a charity race in New Jersey earlier on Saturday appeared not to have injured anyone.
On Sunday, pipe bombs were discovered in New Jersey, and the F.B.I. accidentally detonated one of them. But no injuries were reported.
Was the blast an act of terrorism?
\"We have every reason to believe this was an act of terror,\" Mayor Bill de Blasio said in a news conference on Monday. Initially, officials avoided using that word.
Earlier on Monday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on CNN, \"I would not be surprised if we did have a foreign connection to the act.\"
Mr. Rahami does not appear to have been on a terrorism watch list.
Are there any other suspects?
No one else is actively being sought, Mr. de Blasio said at the news conference.
Five people, including members of Mr. Rahami's family, were taken to an F.B.I. office in Manhattan for questioning after being stopped in a car in Brooklyn on Sunday night. But they were later released, officials said.
Where were the explosive devices found?
The first exploded in a garbage receptacle near a charity race on the Jersey Shore about 9:30 a.m. Saturday.
The second exploded in front of 131 West 23rd Street in Chelsea about 8:30 p.m. on Saturday.
State troopers found a third device nearby, on West 27th Street between Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue, around 11:30 p.m. Saturday.
About 8:45 p.m. Sunday, two men walking from a train station in Elizabeth, N.J., found a backpack containing five explosives on top of a garbage can. The location is about a half-mile from where Mr. Rahami lives.
The map here shows the two Manhattan locations.
What type of devices were found?
Both of the devices in Manhattan -- the one that exploded on West 23rd Street and the other found a few blocks away -- were filled with shrapnel and built from pressure cookers, flip phones and Christmas lights that set off an explosive compound, law enforcement officials said.
The police have confirmed that the photo below, shared on social media, is of the second device found in Manhattan.
BREAKING PHOTO! Here is the second device found by a NYSP Sgt. At 27 street and 7 Ave. investigation is ongoing pic.twitter.com/x7o9Rr30I3 -- New York City Alerts (@NYCityAlerts) September 18, 2016
Some of the devices contained in a backpack in New Jersey were pipe bombs. A local official described the devices involved in the explosion on the Jersey Shore as being constructed in a \"pipe bomb style.\"
Surveillance video footage and fingerprints connected Mr. Rahami to the devices, officials have said.
Credit: KAREN WORKMAN, ELI ROSENBERG and CHRISTOPHER MELE; N.R. Kleinfield contributed reporting.
Word count: 881
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 20, 2016"
