"PARIS -- With some 2.5 million people descending on France for the European Championship soccer tournament, which kicks off Friday, French officials have acknowledged that even as they take all possible steps to prevent and deter terrorist attacks, there is no such thing as zero risk.
In Paris, the police fear they will be so overstretched that they have asked the government to close huge and popular \"fan zones\" for some matches. So far, the government has demurred, even while conceding the risks.
\"We must say the truth to the French people: 0 percent precautions means 100 percent risk, but 100 percent precautions does not mean 0 percent risk,\" Bernard Cazeneuve, the interior minister, said in late May.
At a forum last week, Mr. Cazeneuve was categorical: \"I cannot guarantee that we will not have a confrontation with terrorists.\"
The American and British governments have effectively warned their citizens to stay away, calling the crowded sports events, as well as transportation hubs and other venues broadcasting the games, \"potential targets for terrorist attacks.\"
Security forces have staged nearly 30 drills in cities across France, preparing for bombs, chemical weapons and even drone attacks. Police reinforcements will be brought to Paris from around the country. Some 13,000 private security guards have been hired nationwide.
Euro 2016, a monthlong tournament involving 24 national teams from across Europe, begins Friday in Paris and a total of 51 matches will be played in 10 cities around the country. Arriving after a year in which France was hit by two major terrorist attacks, and after bombings in Brussels in March, the long-scheduled tournament has crystallized the seemingly permanent security fears Europeans must live with day to day in their determination to carry on with life as usual.
The biggest targets, both foreign and French security officials fear, could be the planned outdoor fan zones equipped with enormous screens to televise games. More than 90,000 spectators could gather in the fan zone on the Champ de Mars, in the shadow of the Eiffel Tower in Paris; as many as 80,000 on the white sand beach, the Plage du Prado, in Marseille; and 20,000 on the central Place Bellecour in Lyon, among other places.
In Paris, Marseille, Bordeaux and St.-Denis, these zones will be open almost every night when there is a Euro 2016 match anywhere in the country.
The threat to soccer matches is by no means unfamiliar to the French. The first suicide bombers to explode on the night of the Nov. 13 attacks last year did so at the Stade de France, just outside Paris, where French and German players were on the soccer pitch and President François Hollande was in attendance.
Sporting events have long attracted terrorists, with 168 attacks linked to sports between 1972 and 2004, according to an essay by Richard Walton, the former head of the counterterrorism command for the Metropolitan Police in London, in a publication of the counterterrorism center at West Point.
The most recent suggestion that the Islamic State had its eye on Euro 2016 matches came from Mohamed Abrini, one of the suspects arrested in connection with the attacks in Paris and Brussels. He said that the group intended to target France during the tournament.
It was not certain whether Mr. Abrini meant a Euro 2016 event would be specifically targeted or simply that an attack would be timed to coincide with the games. Either way, a strike would almost certainly cast a pall on, if not derail, the tournament.
Counterterrorism and security officials compared the current security challenge to securing the 2012 London Olympics or Times Square in New York on New Year's Eve, but doing so for a longer period of time and in many more cities.
\"Two things are at stake: France's image and security,\" said Pascal Boniface, the director of the Institute for International and Strategic Relations in Paris, which recently held a forum on the challenges facing France as it hosts the tournament.
\"If there is a problem with security, the country's image will be affected,\" he said. The converse, however, is also true, he said: There could be a huge payoff for France if the tournament concludes safely.
\"We are candidates for the 2024 Olympic Games and, in terms of organization, of security, the Euro is an oral admission exam for the Olympics,\" Mr. Boniface said of the tournament.
In some respects, France is gambling not just on the present, but on the future, since tourism represents 9 percent of the country's gross domestic product, according to the World Travel and Tourism Council. It was the sector most shaken after the Nov. 13 attacks that killed 130 people in and near Paris.
Although there are no specific threats so far, according to France's Interior Ministry, all the available information points to a daunting level of risk.
On the eve of the matches, security forces are reassessing each public space -- the stadiums, public transport and, most of all, the outdoor fan zones -- to ensure access for elite police forces as well as emergency medical services.
The housing facilities for the 24 national teams are also drawing close attention from law enforcement officials, a concern ever since the 1972 attacks in Munich against Israel's Olympic team.
In addition to the potential for bombs, the police and special police forces have prepared for the possibility, however unlikely, they say, of an airborne attack from a civilian drone, which could theoretically drop an explosive or release a chemical substance.
A more likely scenario, they fear, is a repeat of the kind of attack staged in November at the Bataclan concert hall in Paris, where 90 people were gunned down by attackers wearing suicide vests. Another concern is the possibility of lone-wolf attacks by a single individual, which the Islamic State has urged its followers to carry out.
\"The Islamic State and other groups, Al Qaeda, also use bombs, but there's a preference for these kinds of shooting rampages,\" said Henry Wilkinson, the director of intelligence analysis for the Risk Advisory Group, a British company carrying out security assessments for Euro 2016.
Even with all the practice, there is still work to be done, several security experts said.
\"The problem we have is coordination,\" said Olivier Duran, a spokesman for the union that represents private security agents, of whom 13,000 will be helping provide security for the games.
One concern is that in the effort to avoid long lines at entrances to the stadiums and fan zones, the private security guards will be forced to move so rapidly that, at the most crowded venues, it could be difficult for them to do thorough searches, Mr. Duran said.
More worrisome is that in the event of an attack, the private security agents do not have radios or other means of communicating with the police, and vice versa.
The French are still \"beginners\" in communication, Mr. Duran said. \"The English are much more advanced; the Spanish are very advanced. We are the prehistoric era in terms of direct lines of contact, in communication, and the battle will be fought on that ground.\"
Philippe Juvin, the chief of emergency services at the Pompidou Hospital in Paris, which handled many casualties from the November attacks, complained last week that he had yet to be briefed on logistics for the hospital's emergency medical workers.
Yet French officials argue they have tried to take every precaution and have made clear that they will not bow to fear. Nor would they consider moving the tournament to a less-vulnerable country.
Doing so would be \"meeting the terrorists' will,\" Mr. Cazeneuve, the interior minister, said. \"We will never do that.\"
Photograph
A Security Exercise in Lyon, France, Part of Preparations for the Euro 2016 Soccer Championship. (Photograph by Jean-Philippe Ksiazek/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 1322
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 9, 2016"
