"BAGHDAD -- As grief-stricken Iraqis held a candlelight vigil Sunday night at the site of a car bombing that killed more than 150 people, workers often using the flashlights from their cellphones were still pulling bodies from the rubble.
As Sunday gave way to Monday morning, with bodies still buried, some began expressing their grief through politics, waving banners listing the dead and demanding that officials, including Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, resign.
The attack in a shopping area in the Karada neighborhood was the deadliest in Baghdad in many years, and after the final death toll is known it could become the deadliest ever.
As bloody as it was, the bombing in Baghdad was but the worst of a wave of global terrorism in recent days attributed to militants aligned with the Islamic State. Seemingly unconnected to any political purpose and intended to kill indiscriminately, be it by gunfire, explosions or, in the case of a restaurant in Bangladesh, an arsenal including swords, the violence has cut across religions, national identities, ages and professions.
The violence touched people from all parts of the globe. More than 40 were killed at Istanbul's main airport last week -- Saudis, Iraqis and citizens of Iran, China, Tunisia and Ukraine, though most were Turkish. Among the dead were taxi drivers, an interpreter helping tourists, a customs officer and an airport worker who was looking forward to his wedding, which would have been at the end of this week.
In Bangladesh, young men, many of them from privileged backgrounds, used guns, bombs, knives and swords in an assault on foreigners at a popular restaurant on a Friday night. They killed 22 people, many in gruesome fashion. The dead included nine Italians, one of whom was pregnant; seven urban planners from Japan; a Bangladeshi woman who worked for art galleries; a 19-year-old Indian woman attending the University of California, Berkeley; two other college students; and two police officers.
In Iraq, the victims were all Iraqis. Desperate to respond to the public's grief and anger, Mr. Abadi tried to assuage Iraqis' desire for revenge by promising to speed the executions of Islamic State militants on death row. Later in the day, the Justice Ministry announced that five convicted terrorists had been executed, and images of their hangings were shown on state television.
Mr. Abadi also announced a series of new security measures, most prominently an order that the Iraqi police and soldiers stop using bomb detectors that long ago were determined to be fakes. The wandlike devices have been used for years at Baghdad's checkpoints and have been derided by a public angered by the government's inability to protect its citizens. In 2013, a British man was convicted of fraud and sentenced to 10 years in prison for selling millions of dollars' worth of the fake devices to the Iraqi government.
Nevertheless, on Monday morning the police were still using the devices at checkpoints across Baghdad, underscoring how little ever changes, even though Iraq has been consumed by violence for more than a decade. Just this year, through June, nearly 5,000 Iraqi civilians and security force members had been killed by militant attacks and conflict, according to the United Nations.
Protests have been fairly muted so far, with grief for the dead still the overwhelming emotion for Iraqis. That is affording a bit of breathing space for Mr. Abadi, a Shiite who became prime minister in 2014 with the backing of American officials who believed he could reunite the country in the face of an onslaught by the Sunni extremists of the Islamic State.
Still, analysts say, the bombing presents a political challenge. \"This sort of violence can destroy the legitimacy of a leader,\" said Maria Fantappie, the Iraq analyst for the International Crisis Group.
With faith in his ability to unite the country and protect its citizens shaken, Mr. Abadi is likely to face further calls for his ouster, analysts said. They would also not rule out the possible return of street protesters, who twice this year stormed the fortified Green Zone, the secure area that houses government buildings, and ransacked Parliament.
\"I think it will be a bad summer,\" Ms. Fantappie said of the prospect of further protests.
Mr. Abadi has long struggled to secure his power in the face of opposition from other Shiite leaders, including former Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki. Mr. Maliki was pushed out in 2014, partly because Washington believed that he had pursued sectarian policies that alienated the Sunni minority and led to the rise of the Islamic State.
Ever since, Mr. Maliki has sought to undermine Mr. Abadi, and in an interview with the BBC just before the bombing, he said he would happily become prime minister again if \"the country needs me.\"
Hakim al-Zamili, a Shiite lawmaker who is the head of Parliament's Security and Defense Committee, promised an investigation of the bombing and called for the resignations of the officials responsible for securing Baghdad.
The bombing, claimed by the Islamic State, took the glow off Iraq's recent recapture of Falluja from the militant group, a victory that had given Mr. Abadi a substantial political lift. It also undercut his assertion that the taking of Falluja was vital because it served as a haven near Baghdad for the assembly of car bombs.
After the victory in Falluja, optimistic Iraqi officials talked excitedly about marching on Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, which fell to the Islamic State in 2014. But after this latest attack, that operation could be delayed, fulfilling another Islamic State goal. Each time the militant group has lost territory, it has launched attacks in Baghdad, forcing Iraqi officials to concern themselves with security in the capital.
The death toll continued to rise on Monday from the attack, which occurred as Iraqis were out enjoying one of the last evenings of the holy month of Ramadan. They had filled the cafes and shops of the area's malls, buying food and new clothes for Eid al-Fitr, the post-Ramadan celebration, and some were watching Italy and Germany play in the European championship soccer tournament.
Officials said Monday afternoon that 155 had been killed and that at least 192 had been wounded. Dozens of people were still unaccounted for, and many of the bodies were burned beyond recognition.
In its statement claiming responsibility, the Islamic State said it had targeted Shiites. But Karada is a reflection of Baghdad at its multicultural best, with Shiite and Sunni mosques and a smattering of churches. Iraqis of all identities were among the victims.
Hundreds of people gathered at Baghdad's morgue on Monday to try to identify bodies. A morgue worker, Samar Ali, said officials were taking DNA samples from people with missing relatives, in the hope of identifying otherwise unrecognizable bodies, which she said would take at least 16 days.
\"The suffering of the families will last for weeks until we are able to identify them,\" she said.
Iraqis on Monday turned to social media to mourn those they had lost, sharing pictures of loved ones and stories about them. There were many children among the dead, and many young men who were out on the town.
Once again, Iraq said goodbye to some of its best and brightest.
One of those was Ahmad Dhia, who had two young children and was working to advance Iraq's agricultural industry, writing research papers on how to improve crop production and working with ministries. His friends and family called his phone for hours on Sunday before his body was finally pulled from the rubble late in the evening.
My friend Ahmad Dhia has been missing since the explosion, his car was nearby pic.twitter.com/8PfmD0qbTI -- Sajad Jiyad سجاد (@SajadJiyad) July 3, 2016
Another was Adel Euro, who had founded a dance academy in Baghdad and was involved in protests last summer demanding the government tackle corruption. He was also affiliated with a New York-based dance company called Battery Dance, which mentored him online and worked with him last year in Amman, Jordan.
[Video: Modern Dance by Adel Euro Gift to Battery Dance Company Watch on YouTube.]
In honoring him on its Facebook page, Battery Dance used the words that Mr. Euro once wrote alongside a photograph of himself: \"Sometimes in life, we need a few bad days in order to keep the good ones in perspective.\"
Credit: FALIH HASSAN and TIM ARANGO; Falih Hassan reported from Baghdad, and Tim Arango from Beirut, Lebanon. Omar Al-Jawoshy contributed reporting from Baghdad.
Photograph
A Vigil On Sunday in the Karada Neighborhood of Baghdad, Where More Than 150 People Were Killed in an Attack Linked to Militants Aligned with the Islamic State. (Photograph by Hadi Mizban/Associated Press)
Word count: 1465
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 5, 2016"
