"When Donald Trump first called for a \"total and complete\" shutdown of Muslim immigration into the United States last December, Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana rejected that stance as \"offensive and unconstitutional.\" But that was then.
Once he was chosen as Mr. Trump's running mate this summer, Mr. Pence instantly became one of the strongest Republican voices to echo Mr. Trump's anti-immigrant broadsides, pronouncing himself \"very supportive.\"
And on Wednesday Indiana officials went before a federal appeals court in Chicago to defend Mr. Pence's outrageous order to block Syrian refugees from settling in Indiana by denying them aid for social services.
Exodus Refugee Immigration, a social services group that sued to stop the order, argued that under constitutional principles states may not interfere with or penalize refugees who are in the federal refugee resettlement program, which ultimately decides where to send them.
The order was struck down earlier this year by a federal district judge in Indianapolis, who rejected the state's contention that it was needed as a defense against terrorists. Judge Tanya Walton Pratt found instead that Mr. Pence's order \"clearly constitutes national origin discrimination\" in a policy of \"punishing Syrian refugees already in Indiana in the hopes that no more will come.\"
As Mr. Trump's running mate, Mr. Pence is in no position to back down from carrying the ticket's nativist banner. So the state appealed Judge Pratt's ruling, and on Wednesday was back in court to argue that the anti-refugee order was similar to quarantining the contagiously ill from contaminating Indiana's residents.
Members of the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit were highly skeptical as they grilled Indiana's solicitor general, Thomas Fisher. \"Are Syrians the only Muslims Indiana fears?\" asked Judge Richard Posner, who noted that the refugee families from Syria have been thoroughly screened by the State Department. \"You are so out of it! You don't think there are dangers from other countries?\" he asked.
Judge Frank Easterbrook said slyly that the state's insistence that barring Syrians has nothing to do with rank discrimination \"produces nothing but a broad smile.\"
The resettlement program drew loud protests from more than 20 governors when it was announced a year ago. But despite xenophobic warnings about unknown newcomers, the governors can do little to stop the resettlements. Since last October, 11,491 Syrian refugees have arrived in the United States, according to the Pew Charitable Trust's Stateline, and more are likely to arrive, according to the Obama administration's plans.
But there stands Mr. Pence, on guard duty for the Trump campaign, while his pathetic anti-refugee position collapses in court, as more than 170 Syrians are starting new lives in Indiana.
Credit: THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Word count: 456
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 15, 2016"
