"This bone-chilling documentary featuring suspected Isis masked murderer Abu Rumaysah is shocking but important TV. Plus: Barely Legal Grafters takes a sidelong look at Britain's burgeoning black market
A 30-year-old father of four with a bouncy castle business shows film-maker Jamie Roberts around Walthamstow in north east London, talking about himself and his life. He was born into a Hindu family, not far away in Palmers Green, but at the age of 19 he converted to Islam. Here is his messy garage, full of stuff, an old cooker, an H&M carrier bag, a bunch of the black Isis flags that \"will one day fly high over 10 Downing Street\". The man is part of the group of radical extremists Roberts will spend two years following around.
He doesn't feature for long in The Jihadis Next Door (Channel 4), but his dark shadow hangs over it. Soon after filming this he jumped bail and left the country with his family, to France, and on to Syria. Now, he is thought to be the masked murderer of five men accused by Isis of spying for Britain in the video released a couple of weeks ago. Abu Rumaysah is now one of the world's most wanted men. Yes, he's that bouncy castle guy.
Others remain for Roberts to film. Abu Haleema are Mohammed Shamsuddin mainly, seen here eating a takeaway while watching a video. And laughing -- it's a funny video, apparently. Hilarious YouTube clips -- the worst-ever goalkeeping mistakes maybe, or a tortoise having sex with a shoe, perhaps -- you might think if you didn't know who Haleema and Shamsuddin were and what they believed. But no, they're watching a brutal Isis video. People are being drowned in a cage. Others have explosive belts wrapped around their necks which are then detonated. \"The guy's foaming at the mouth, wow!\" laughs Shamsuddin. \"And I'm eating, hahahaha.\"
It's a shocking moment in a bone-chilling documentary. Roberts says he was nervous about making it, giving a small group the media platform they crave. But with Isis on the rise, and the terror alert level at severe, he thinks it's important to at least try to understand the motives of people like these; to find out if they are simply non-violent extremists, as they say, or a real threat to the way we live.
At times, it verges on comical, almost Chris Morris's Four Lions. Like when Haleema talks about honing his oratory skills for his YouTube recruitment videos. \"When I started at first, I was speaking too loosely,\" says the some-time bus driver. \"You know, I kept saying things like 'innit', 'innit innit innit'. I'm trying to remove that, innit.\" Or when he's thinking about where in Ealing would be the best spot for public killings (Haven Green, apparently). But there's nothing inept about this lot, they know exactly what they are doing, and what they can say and get away with. And we now know what Rumaysah is accused of. Nothing funny about that.
Jamie Roberts was absolutely right to make this documentary. It is important and brave, even if it might be hard to even begin to understand people who are so unflinching, unquestioning and blind in their conviction, and who can laugh so casually at a tea-time murder video. The hashtag suggestion displayed on screen, to get involved with the conversation, is #jihadisnextdoor; it would be surprising -- and a shame -- if there wasn't also some #youaintnomuslimbruv going on, too.
After that, it's hard to get too worked up about Barely Legal Grafters (BBC2), which takes a sidelong look (with a raised eyebrow, too) at the characters involved in Britain's burgeoning black market. People like middle-class Mark, a former Porsche-driving advertising exec who now likes to zag-zig through life, he says, as opposed to zig-zagging, which is what most people do. In practice, zag-zigging means filling the tank of his diesel people carrier with sunflower oil every month, then driving to Belgium and loading up with half-price cigarettes (zag-cigging?), then hoping not to be stopped by Dover customs. Is coming on here a good idea Mark?
But my favourite is ticket tout Slim. Or Albert, as he calls himself to his clients, because Albert sounds more \"trusting\", not a word that immediately springs to mind for Slim the name or Slim the man. \"At the moment? I'm in Newcastle at the moment,\" he says down the phone from his flat in Birmingham. \"It's just that I'm an ambulance driver and we can't answer phones while we're driving.\" Albert the ambulance driver, now there's a man you can trust.
Slim's mum is proud of him, at least: \"Very, very proud of what he's done,\" she says, proudly. He's certainly a television natural, so much so he has already featured on one Channel 4 documentary about touts. I thought I recognised him, maybe I've just bought something off him.
Credit: Sam Wollaston
Word count: 831
(Copyright , Guardian Newspapers Limited, Jan 20, 2016)"
