"Stretching along the south belly of Roland Garros, Boulevard d'Auteuil has been eerily quiet without its usual traffic, the road blocked off at either end of the tournament site because of increased security at this year's French Open.
Only local residents and tournament-necessary cars are allowed to pass through, one of many measures implemented at the tournament this year after November's terror attacks that killed 130 and left this city and country shaken.
France remains under a state of emergency, and the French Open at Roland Garros is the start of six consecutive weeks of big-time sporting events in Paris, with the city set to host the Euro Cup soccer tournament starting June 10.
\"It is really the heart of our priorities this year,\" tournament director Guy Forget said at the outset of the French Open.
The security is tangible: Long lines have stretched outside the grounds in the early days of the event, with a double-barricade barrier erected for pedestrians. Only three points of entrance are usable this year compared with the five that have been used in the past.
Pat-downs and bag checks are being implemented for all visitors, and metal wands and bomb-sniffing dogs have been used. Walk-through metal detectors, commonplace at the U.S. Open in New York, are not in use.
Players have noticed the stepped-up security.
\"With what has happened several months ago in Paris and where the world is at this moment, of course we need to tighten up the security,\" world No.1 Novak Djokovic said. \"I have nothing against it. You know, better safe than sorry.\"
\"I think a lot of the players wanted a little bit more security,\" women's No. 1 Serena Williams said. \"We just want to be here. We want to do what we do. We just want to play tennis.\"
Roland Garros has suffered from more security breaches than the sport's other major tournament sites in the recent past. In 2009, 2013 and last year, uninvited fans found their way onto Philippe-Chatrier Court.
After Roger Federer's first match last year, a selfie-seeking young man ran onto the court as Federer packed his bag. The Swiss player was alarmed at the breach of security.
\"I'm not happy about it,\" Federer told reporters after the incident. \"I definitely think this is something that needs to happen quickly. Normally I only speak on behalf of myself, but in this situation I think I can speak on behalf of all the players, that that's where you do your job, that's where you want to feel safe.\"
Eric Butorac, an American doubles player and president of the ATP's Player Council, voiced his concern about security here in a USA TODAY Sports interview this week.
\"It was always a fairly lax tournament, which as a player you can appreciate. But given what's going on in our world, let's be as safe as possible,\" he said.
\"(This year here is) still nowhere as intense as going into the U.S. Open or Wimbledon,\" Butorac continued. \"Historically it's been more relaxed here, as the French culture is. It's stricter here, yes, but not as strict as the U.S. or Wimbledon. I also don't pretend to know everything that goes on.\"
French Tennis Federation officials said security personnel had been increased by 25% and a coordinated effort had been organized with the French police.
Officials among the four Grand Slam tournaments discuss security operations regularly, though not in a coordinated effort with the men's (ATP World Tour) and women's (WTA) tours.
A meeting is set for the U.S. Open to discuss security that includes all four majors and the tours, marking the first time such a meeting has taken place.
As rain fell Monday morning, fans stood in long lines to get into the stadium, many complaining to officials about the wait. But it is a new reality in Paris and around the world.
Credit: Nick McCarvel, @NickMcCarvel, Special for USA TODAY Sports
Illustration
photo Robert Ghement, EPA
Word count: 697
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
