"DHAKA, Bangladesh -- The police detained three men early Sunday in connection with the killing of a Hindu tailor, the latest in a series of hacking deaths in the country. Islamist militants are believed to be responsible for most of the killings.
The police in the Tangail district, where the tailor was killed around noon on Saturday, also recovered a bloodstained shirt that they believe one of the killers removed as he fled, Mohammad Aslam Khan, a senior police official in the district, said in a telephone interview. The police in Tangail, in central Bangladesh, have no idea who committed the attack, Mr. Khan said.
The tailor, Nikhil Chandra Joarder, 52, died after three people attacked him with sharp objects outside his shop in Gopalpur, an area in Tangail, the police said.
Mr. Khan said the detained men were Rafiqul Islam Badsha, 50, the secretary of the local affiliate of Jamaat-e-Islami, an opposition party and the country's largest Islamist party; Jhontu Mia, a local activist with the Bangladesh Nationalist Party, another opposition party, which has held power in the past; and Moulana Aminul Islam, the principal of the local madrasa.
Both parties have been accused of criminal activity in the past, including torching vehicles and killing people, Mr. Khan said.
Mr. Islam filed a case in 2012 accusing the tailor of making derogatory remarks about the Prophet Muhammad, Mr. Khan said. Mr. Joarder was briefly jailed for blasphemy before the charges were withdrawn.
Islamic State militants have claimed responsibility for Mr. Joarder's killing, citing the tailor's blasphemy, according to SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors jihadist websites. Over the past two years, intellectuals, secular writers, members of religious minorities and activists who have published views critical of Islam have been killed by extremists in Bangladesh.
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina of the Awami League party has denied the presence of the Islamic State or other international terror groups in Bangladesh. Last week, she blamed opposition parties for the recent killings, saying the parties aim to destabilize the country.
Killings by hacking have accelerated in the past month. Mr. Joarder was the fifth person killed over the past 10 days.
The three men in custody could not be reached Sunday for comment. But Habibur Rahman, the chief of Jamaat-e-Islami's Gopalpur unit, said in a telephone interview that the arrest of Mr. Badsha, the local party secretary, was \"totally false.\"
\"No Jamaat leader was involved at all with this killing incident,\" Mr. Rahman said. He accused the police of falsely detaining Mr. Badsha merely to show the public that \"they have made progress into the investigation.\"
Saying he personally knew Mr. Islam, the principal, Mr. Rahman added, \"I believe he cannot be involved with such type of killing incident.\"
Mr. Khan said the police had reason to be suspicious of the three men because of their past activities. \"We will interrogate them, and if we get any significant information from them regarding Nikhil's murder, then this will help to make headway into the investigation,\" he said.
Credit: JULFIKAR ALI MANIK and GEETA ANAND; Julfikar Ali Manik reported from Dhaka, and Geeta Anand reported from Mumbai.
Word count: 532
Copyright New York Times Company May 2, 2016"
