"Unidentified assailants attacked a hotel on Monday that is used by European Union military officials in Bamako, the capital of Mali, an African nation that has struggled with recurrent instability and assaults by Islamist militants.
The European Union's military mission in Mali said in a Twitter post that its headquarters there had been attacked but that no casualties among its personnel had been reported and that it was \"securing the area.\" The mission is housed in the Nord-Sud hotel, in a section of Bamako frequented by foreigners.
EUTM-MALI HQ has been attacked. No EUTM-Mali personnel has been hurt or injured during the attack. EUTM-Mali is at the securing the area. -- eutmmali (@eutmmali1) March 21, 2016
The United States Embassy in Bamako warned in a Twitter post that American citizens should avoid the affected area \"until further notice and shelter in place.\" The post said the embassy compound was in \"duck and cover status.\"
The embassy said later in a Facebook post that it was advising all United States citizens in the area to 'shelter in place until further notice' and that it was sharply curtailing embassy activities on Tuesday.
There was no immediate word on who the attackers were. Reuters said in a brief report, quoting a witness, that unidentified gunmen had sought to enter the hotel.
Mali, a former French colony, has long been an incubator for Islamist militancy. In a brazen assault four months ago, gunmen invaded another Bamako hotel, the Radisson Blu, leaving at least 19 people dead. Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, the Qaeda affiliate in North Africa, claimed responsibility for that attack.
Since then, the group has attacked hotels frequented by foreigners in two neighboring African nations, Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast.
Other instability has troubled Mali in recent years as groups affiliated with Al Qaeda tore through the north of the country, at one point seizing considerable territory that they governed until French forces arrived to stop militants' advances in early 2013 south toward Bamako.
The French scattered the groups, and fighters have launched numerous attacks since then on United Nations outposts and elsewhere.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Credit: RICK GLADSTONE; Dionne Searcey contributed reporting from Dakar, Senegal.
Word count: 390
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 22, 2016"
