"The scene that unfolded at a McDonald's in Times Square on Wednesday has played out more than 800 times across New York City in the days since a bomb rattled Chelsea. Police officers rushed into the fast-food restaurant, evacuated customers and their half-eaten breakfasts and shut down a busy thoroughfare.
The police said there had been a call around 8:15 a.m. about a suspicious package: a rolling suitcase left unattended.
Times Square Mcdonalds on 42nd right now as NYPD investigate suspicious package. Sending in hero bomb tech pic.twitter.com/b9soPq0Eaa -- Nick Consonery (@nconsonery) September 21, 2016
Clayton Da Silva, a ticket agent for the tour company Big Bus, was working near the restaurant, which is on 42nd Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, when he saw a police car stop a truck before a rush of officers arrived and put up barricades. Everyone was told to leave.
\"When we asked what happened,\" Mr. Da Silva said, \"they said it was an emergency.\"
People in New York have been on heightened alert since an explosion in Chelsea on Saturday night, which was linked to another on the Jersey Shore earlier in the day, in what the authorities said were terror attacks carried out by Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28.
Mr. Rahami was also accused of dropping an explosive device, a pressure cooker laced with explosives and wired to a cellphone, on Saturday on West 27th Street, where it failed to detonate. The authorities said he also left five pipe bombs in a trash can at an Elizabeth, N.J., train station on Sunday night.
According to charging documents, he was inspired by Al Qaeda and the Islamic State.
From the Chelsea bombing around 8:30 p.m. on Saturday until 2 p.m. on Wednesday, police officers had investigated 818 \"suspicious packages\" reported by people in New York, the police said. Normally, the police respond to about 42 calls a day for suspicious packages, officials said.
Sgt. Carlos Nieves, a spokesman for the Police Department, said an increase was normal after an attack, such as the attempted bombing of Times Square in 2010. People in New York, fearful of another attack, report odd-looking packages, bags left on trains, or luggage parked outside of stores by patrons reluctant to lug them inside, he said.
The owners often \"come back 15 minutes later, and it's surrounded by cops,\" Sergeant Nieves said.
The police commissioner, James P. O'Neill, said at a news conference on Wednesday that the heightened alertness was exactly what the city needs at this time. \"That's what we need to do,\" he said, \"is make sure that we investigate everything.\"
The suitcase at the McDonald's was empty and harmless, the police said.
Credit: ASHLEY SOUTHALL; Emily Palmer contributed reporting.
Word count: 463
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 22, 2016"
