"An embarrassing security blunder brought chaos and disruption to the final day of the English Premier League soccer season Sunday, as tens of thousands of fans at Manchester United's iconic Old Trafford stadium were evacuated by police because of a suspected bomb threat.
United, one of the most famed and successful teams in the world, was to host Bournemouth to conclude its season. After a package described as \"incredibly lifelike\" by police was discovered -- it included a taped device made up of a cellphone and protruding wires -- the game was postponed and fans ordered out of the 75,635-seat venue.
However, late Sunday in the United Kingdom, Greater Manchester Police revealed that instead of having been planted as a hoax terror threat, as originally suspected, the device had been accidentally left behind in a security training exercise.
\"It is outrageous this situation arose, and a full inquiry is required to urgently find out how this happened, why it happened and who will be held accountable,\" Manchester police and crime commissioner Tony Lloyd said in a statement. \"This fiasco caused massive inconvenience to supporters who had come from far and wide to watch the match, wasted the time of huge numbers of police officers and the army's bomb squad, and unnecessarily put people in danger.\"
Earlier in the day, bomb disposal experts carried out a controlled explosion of the device, but not before a nervous air descended upon Old Trafford, with the game being called off. The match will take place Tuesday, with United offering refunds to all ticket holders and free entry.
There will be frustration directed at United, with this embarrassment coming at the end of a disappointing season on the field. Chief executive Ed Woodward pledged to investigate how the package was not removed as part of the training exercise while insisting \"the safety of fans is always our highest priority.\"
Yet the bizarre saga also is a reminder that security measures and soccer now go hand in hand. The sport is a legitimate target for those who seek attention or to manufacture harm. That is why for all the fear and tension and disappointment, there was little in the way of protest Sunday, just concern and a nervous wait for more information.
Soccer fans need no reminder that being the most popular game on the planet does not detach it from terrorism.
Last week, 16 fans of Spanish club Real Madrid were gunned down at a supporters function in the Iraqi capital of Baghdad by Islamic State fundamentalists. The Paris attacks in November included a soccer element -- a suicide bomber tried to enter Stade de France, where the French national team was playing Germany, before detonating the device outside.
Days later, a match between Germany and Netherlands in Hanover, Germany, was canceled a bomb threat.
The higher-profile the venue, the occasion or the vested parties, the bigger the potential threat, and sports officials have found it necessary to become increasingly vigilant. This is why a potential terror threat to Manchester United, on the last and one of the most-viewed days of the season, was believable.
Credit: Martin Rogers, @mrogersUSAT, USA TODAY Sports
Word count: 548
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
