"The city struggled to return to normal one week after suicide bombings, amid concerns that suspects remain at large and the Islamic State is recruiting young Belgian Muslims with text messages.
\"My brothers, why not join us in the fight against the Westerners, make good choices in your life,\" says a French-language message posted on Twitter reportedly sent to young peoples' phones after the terror attacks at the Brussels airport and a busy subway station.
Jamal Ikazban, a regional lawmaker from the troubled Molenbeek neighborhood, alerted police to the phone messages Monday and posted it to Twitter.
\"Our young people are victims of propaganda texts, we have to act to put these recruiters out of action,\" he tweeted.
In another example of recruiting young Muslims in largely immigrant neighborhoods such as Molenbeek, French radio ran an interview with a 15-year-old boy who said he'd been tempted to join the Islamic State by a man who approached him in a Brussels mosque.
\"He showed me a video with people who said they died as martyrs, actually they went to their deaths laughing, smiling,\" the boy told Europe 1 radio. \"He told me, 'if you die, you'll have paradise.'\"
The boy, whom the station did not name, said his mother eventually persuaded him not to follow the recruiter to Syria.
Some analysts are not surprised by these recruitment efforts.
\"We have an issue with radicalization here,\" said John Duhig, a Brussels-based expert on extremist recruitment at the European Foundation for Democracy. \"This is about young people who are preyed upon by radicals, but it's not just an issue within Belgium, it's an issue in cities right across Europe.\"
He said Belgian efforts to counter radicalization were hindered by the country's \"complicated and bureaucratic system.\"
Examples of continued Islamic State recruitment added to the unease in the Belgian capital as police pressed ahead to track down suspects linked to last week's bombings.
Belgian authorities are coming under increasing criticism after revelations of apparent blunders before, during and after the attacks.
Turkey had warned about one of the airport bombers. And a prime suspect was set free Monday because of a lack of evidence, despite being charged last week with terrorist killings.
Local media named the man as Fayal Cheffou and said he was believed to be the \"man in the hat\" caught on video accompanying two suicide bombers minutes before they blew themselves up at the Brussels Airport. After the man was released, authorities said they were still looking for the man in the video wearing the hat.
Ames reported from Lisbon, Portugal
Credit: Paul Ames and Maya Vidon, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo AURORE BELOT, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 480
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
