"BRZEGI, Poland -- Pope Francis celebrated the last Mass of his trip to Poland on Sunday before one million pilgrims near Krakow as he discussed, once again, the terrorist threat and migrant crisis. The pope urged young people during the weekend to stand up to violence, hatred and terror instead of being \"couch potatoes\" glued to \"the screen of a cellphone.\"
Reinforcing remarks he made many times during his five-day stay in Poland about those who suffer -- the sick, people with disabilities, the elderly and, especially, refugees -- the pope expressed concern that young people \"confuse happiness with a sofa\" as they become indifferent to the increasingly dark events of the world.
Francis, 79, said last week that the killing of an 85-year-old priest in France, among other terrorist attacks, was proof that the \"world is at war,\" though one that was not caused by religion.
\"Today's world demands that you be a protagonist of history, because life is always beautiful when we choose to live it fully, when we choose to leave a mark,\" he said Sunday as he addressed pilgrims on a vast field in Brzegi, a village about seven miles east of Krakow, for World Youth Day.
\"Some situations seem distant until, in some way, we touch them,\" Francis said on Saturday night. \"We don't appreciate certain things because we only see them on the screen of a cellphone or a computer.\"
\"The times we live in do not call for young couch potatoes, but for young people with shoes or, better, boots laced. It only takes players on the first string, and it has no room for bench warmers.\"
In Poland, in his first trip to Central and Eastern Europe, Francis used his remarks about the trappings of complacency to underscore a growing resistance in post-Communist countries to accepting refugees.
Even though the conservative government in Poland is closely aligned with the Roman Catholic Church, it disagrees with the pope on the issue of migrants and refugees.
\"The pope and politicians have different missions,\" the deputy prime minister, Jaroslaw Gowin, told a Polish web portal last week. \"The pope is concerned with your salvation. I am concerned with your safety.\"
\"As for taking in migrants from Muslim countries, our government was and is against that,\" Mr. Gowin, a Catholic, added.
On Saturday night, Francis was followed to the podium in Brzegi by Rand Mittri, a 26-year-old from Aleppo, Syria, which has been devastated by civil war. Ms. Mittri said that despite \"the suffering,\" many in her home city tried to live just as anyone else did, leaving each day for work or school.
\"Unlike many of you, however, we are stunned by fear in that very moment that we will not return to our homes or our families as we left them,\" Ms. Mittri said, her voice wobbling. \"Perhaps we will be killed that day, or perhaps our families will.\"
Many pilgrims, who roamed around the village during the weekend, hoisting national flags in the air and singing Catholic anthems from their home countries, were struck by Ms. Mittri's words.
\"I actually cried when I listened to her,\" said Alessandra Cattaneo, 22, a political science student from Italy. \"It's good to be reminded how lucky we are, not having to endure such suffering every day.\"
Andrew Chesnut, a professor of religious studies at Virginia Commonwealth University who came here to observe the pope's visit, said, \"Pope Francis is really at his best and most eloquent when addressing the youth.\"
But the biggest question now, Professor Chesnut said in an interview on Friday, is this: \"Will there be any real effects of the pope's preaching, apart from euphoria?\" He continued, \"Are these young people really going to be agents of evangelism?\"
Francis announced that Panama would host the next World Youth Day in 2019. President Juan Carlos Varela of Panama, who accompanied the pope in Krakow, said in an interview on Saturday that he hoped the papal visit to Central America would help bring peace to his troubled region.
\"Both Poland and Panama have been democracies since 1989. But unlike Poland, Central America is still in crisis,\" Mr. Varela said. \"Even more people are being killed today than during the civil wars in the 1970s and 1980s. Being here has reminded me that John Paul II defeated a cruel regime just with his faith and love. So now, we need Pope Francis to plant a seed of peace and love in our region.\"
Photograph
Pope Francis On Sunday in Brzegi, Poland, Where As Many As a Million Pilgrims Gathered for World Youth Day Celebrations. (Photograph by Janek Skarzynski/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 796
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 1, 2016"
