"Physicians at Orlando Regional Medical Center on Tuesday detailed the scramble to save lives in an overwhelmed emergency room after the shooting spree at a gay nightclub that left 49 victims dead and dozens more struggling to survive.
Six victims of Sunday's massacre remained in critical condition. Twenty-one others remained hospitalized. The gunman was killed by police at Pulse, which was crowded with dancing revelers on Latin Night.
\"I will be surprised if we don't see the death toll rise\" or see patients left with long-term injuries, physician Michael Cheatham said at a news conference at the hospital. \"There is no question that nurses saved lives\" in the grueling hours as victims poured into the emergency room,\" Cheatham said.
Hospital trauma director Joseph Ibrahim likened the situation to \"a war scene\" that had \"patients in every corner.\" Surgeon Chadwick Smith said he was on duty when shooting victims began arriving at the hospital shortly after 2 a.m. Victims were dropped off via ambulances, police cruisers, trucks and private vehicles.
\"They were coming in non-stop,\" Smith said of the victims. He began calling in more physicians: \"I said, 'This is not a drill, this is not a joke.'\"
Nurses and technicians also rolled in. Smith said he worked triage, ranking patients based on the severity of their injuries.
\"I just cannot say enough about how much we increased our resources to the level of need in a very short period of time,\" he said.
Survivor Angel Colon thanked the hospital staff for the care he was provided. He described the horrifying moments at Pulse when the shooting began. He said he and his friends were wrapping up the night of partying with hugs when gunshots rang out.
\"We grabbed each other and started running,\" Colon said. \"I was shot three times in my leg and fell down.\"
Fleeing patrons trampled him, he said, and his leg was shattered. When the shooter went into another room, Colon hoped someone would stop him, but minutes later, the gunman returned, shooting people where they had fallen to ensure they were dead.
\"He shoots the girl next to me, and I'm laying down, I'm thinking, 'I'm next. I'm dead,'\" Colon recalled. The gunman, identified as Omar Mateen, fired twice at Colon. He said he was hit in the hand and the hip.
\"I was prepared to stay there, laying down, so he won't know I'm alive,\" Colon said. Later, a police officer grabbed him and dragged him out, he said.
The investigation into the attack, the deadliest mass shooting in U.S. history, continued Tuesday. President Obama reiterated that there is no indication Mateen, who pledged allegiance to the Islamic State in a 911 call, directly communicated with militants from the terrorist group.
\"It is increasingly clear that the killer took in extremist information and propaganda over the Internet,\" Obama said, calling Mateen \"an unstable young man who became radicalized.\"
He again called for \"common-sense steps\" to curb gun access. \"People who aren't allowed on a plane shouldn't be allowed a gun,\" he said.
Obama took aim at presumptive GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump. \"Yapping,\" he said, won't win the war on terror.
In Port St. Lucie, Ed Henson, the gun shop owner who sold weapons to Mateen, said he passed a background check.
Contributing: Will Greenlee,
USA TODAY NETWORK
Credit: Rick Neale and John Bacon, USA TODAY NETWORK
Illustration
photo BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 607
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
