"PARIS -- American commanders are considering whether to establish a presence at Iraqi military outposts and bases north of Baghdad ahead of a looming fight against Islamic State militants in Mosul, defense officials said Friday.
Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the country's top military officer, said discussions between American and Iraqi commanders and officials had begun on how American forces would \"integrate\" with Iraqi military units to take back Mosul.
\"It's fair to say that we will have positions up in the north that will facilitate supporting Iraqi security forces,\" General Dunford told reporters traveling with him in Paris.
One of the crucial questions to be answered, General Dunford said, is just how closely American trainers and advisers will work with the Iraqi military and with the Kurdish pesh merga fighters as they try to take back Mosul from the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.
American forces established a training hub at Al Taqqadum, an Iraqi base near the town of Habbaniya in eastern Anbar Province, to aid in the successful retaking of the city of Ramadi last month.
Iraqi and American military leaders must decide whether the American trainers and advisers will embed with Iraqi forces at the operational headquarters, farther from the fight, or with the brigades, closer to the fighting.
After the success in Ramadi, General Dunford said, the question is \"how can we be more integrated in Mosul?\"
The Mosul operation is probably months away. The United States is first trying to isolate Islamic State forces in Mosul from supply lines from their stronghold of Raqqa, in neighboring Syria. American military planners also want to cut off Raqqa from the rest of the Islamic State's territory in Syria.
General Dunford also said the United States was considering a request from Turkey to train and equip \"hundreds\" of Syrian Arabs who have lost their homes to the Islamic State. \"They want to go back and take their homelands, and we want to support them in doing that,\" he said.
Word count: 355
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 23, 2016"
