"If law enforcement officials wanted to stage a mock terrorist attack to test security at New York City's Kennedy International Airport, they couldn't have planned it better than what actually happened on Aug. 14. That Sunday evening passengers at the huge network of terminals suddenly began hearing noises, followed shortly by reports -- false, it turned out -- of gunfire.
Hordes of people began running and screaming at rumors of a bomb or a shooter on the loose. In the end, there were no deaths, no serious injuries -- and no gunman. And it's still not clear what set off the panic. One theory is that loud cheering that greeted Usain Bolt's victory at the Olympics could have prompted calls to 911.
Whatever the cause, and however great the fright, the episode had one useful upside: It exposed serious flaws at all levels of airport security, including at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs and polices Kennedy, La Guardia and Newark Liberty International Airports; and at federal agencies like the Transportation Safety Administration, which screens passengers, and Customs and Border Control, a division of the Department of Homeland Security.
Officials were slow to respond and seemed confused or even ignorant of security protocols, and there were reports of T.S.A. agents abandoning their posts. There was no obvious chain of command, and no coordination among the responsible agencies -- all of which was deeply alarming, given the terrorist attacks this year at airports in Brussels and Istanbul.
The main defense against terrorism at New York's regional airports is the Port Authority police force, which failed to take control of the situation. The force includes about 1,800 officers who are supposed to guard airports, bridges and tunnels. Shortly after the Kennedy incident, Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York called for an inquiry into what happened. He shares responsibility with New Jersey for overseeing the agency, which has been beset with political and managerial problems.
On Sunday, Senator Charles Schumer of New York called for the Department of Homeland Security to conduct a swift federal review of the official response to determine and \"fix\" what caused the chaos. Mr. Schumer, noting that the airport's security is handled by a \"patchwork\" of agencies, said that the scare \"raises very disturbing questions about the state of preparedness and coordination if -- heaven forbid -- a real attack were to occur.\"
Mr. Schumer asked Homeland Security to examine whether cameras are correctly placed; whether there are proper drills for such episodes; and how the Port Authority and other agencies can alert passengers swiftly and accurately. Security at Kennedy is clearly not as tight as travelers deserve; getting this basic information is only a start.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
Credit: THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Word count: 489
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 24, 2016"
