"The documentary has hit a nerve in France but it could be vital in defeating a twisted ideology
France has had a troubled history with film censorship, so it was hardly surprising when rumours circulated that Les Salafistes, a documentary on violent jihadi groups in the Middle East and the Sahel region of Africa, might be banned.
In the end, that didn't happen. Fleur Pellerin, the French culture minister, decided this week to authorise its release in cinemas, but with an adult certificate -- under-18s aren't allowed to see it. The ministry cited the \"necessary protection of youth\", noting \"scenes and language of extreme violence\" without any voiceover narration that might contextualise them.
The documentary includes footage from propaganda videos issued by Islamic State and al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, and interviews with salafist religious leaders and jihadi militants. It also shows scenes of life under sharia law in northern Mali when it was under jihadi control in 2012 (before the French-led military intervention), as well as in the Isis-controlled cities of Raqqa in Syria, and Mosul in Iraq.
The film's co-directors -- Francois Margolin, from France, and Lemine Ould M Salem, a Mauritanian -- said their intention was to show how salafist ideology is described by its proponents and theologians, and the realities of its implementation. Critics have argued their approach might backfire and serve as a platform promoting jihadism, rather than denouncing its horrors.
It is at times a difficult film, especially for someone like me, who has refrained from watching Isis videos online because of their horror. The most gruelling moment comes when an Isis propaganda film shows a line of captured men walking towards the banks of a river; jihadi militants then shoot them in the head, one by one. The waters of the river start flowing with blood. And we see the pleading, panic-stricken faces of Isis's victims, filmed close-up just before they are killed. If Les Salafistes is meant to make us more aware of what is going on in the lands Isis and other fanatical Islamic groups control, it does so in a powerful way. But might it be misunderstood? Might it be twisted to serve other goals?
The fact that a debate has raged around the film reflects the sensitivity of the issue in a country that suffered two traumatic terrorist attacks last year, after which French authorities put the country on a \"war footing\" and restricted civil liberties.
It is at times a difficult film for someone like me, who has refrained from watching Isis videos because of their horror
France has long had strict laws against hate speech and genocide denial. But when a police crackdown, shortly after the Charlie Hebdo shootings led to the arrest of over 50 people -- some of them teenagers -- for \"inciting terrorism\", human rights campaigners expressed concerns about limitations to free speech. Would films now face increased scrutiny?
This was no light matter because political censorship has long existed in France. It took years for a documentary -- October in Paris -- on the killings of hundreds of peaceful pro-Algerian independence demonstrators by the French police in 1961 to finally be allowed on cinema screens. A documentary (Partie de Campagne) by the celebrated film director Raymond Depardon, revealing the inside story of Valery Giscard d'Estaing's 1974 presidential campaign, was censored until 2002 (because the main protagonist objected to it).
Les Salafistes attempts to cast a similar spotlight on disturbing events and characters. It is no wonder that Claude Lanzmann, the director of Shoah, strongly defended the film -- declaring that it was a \"true masterpiece\" depicting some realities \"as never any book or specialist of Islam has done before\".
He is right in one sense. By contrasting the salafists' language (claiming their brand of Islam reflects \"genuine equality among men\") with images of public beatings and executions (including a scene where a gay man is thrown from the top of a building in Raqqa), the film implacably denounces these groups. And it's not as if banning young people from seeing the film will stop anyone from accessing the online videos Isis uses for its recruitment.
But Les Salafistes deals with a wider danger that has obvious national security implications for France: almost all the perpetrators of the 2015 terrorist attacks were young French Muslims. The mixed reactions to the film have brought some political taboos to the fore. If this film were to be shown in several years, when France's \"war\" with jihadism would hopefully have ended, there would be no such controversy. But by touching on a raw, contemporary nerve, the film highlights the ongoing phenomenon of indoctrination -- at a time when France's political leadership has largely preferred to gloss over the fact that the 2015 terrorism was homegrown.
It's true that Les Salafistes requires a certain level of maturity or knowledge if its intentions are to be correctly understood. But that doesn't mean teenagers can't see its message clearly. Only minds, be they children's or adults', that have already been contaminated by Isis ideology will see it as a vindication of their views.
The debate around the film shows up France's current anxieties. It opens our eyes to a fanatical world that we struggle to understand -- and one we are only too happy to let the army and security forces deal with. Yet we in France and elsewhere also need to understand that ideology, however twisted and repulsive, if there is to be any hope of defeating it.
Credit: Natalie Nougayrede
Word count: 933
(Copyright , Guardian Newspapers Limited, Jan 30, 2016)"
