"Investigators were reviewing a range of possible terrorist links to a gunman who professed his allegiance to the Islamic State from the scene of a horrific mass shooting at a crowded Orlando nightclub early Sunday that left at least 50 dead and 53 others wounded, two federal law enforcement officials said.
The officials, who are not authorized to comment publicly, identified the attacker as Omar Mateen, 29, of Fort Pierce, Fla.
Mateen acknowledged his allegiance to the Islamic State during a 911 call to local law enforcement from the nightclub in which he claimed responsibility for the shootings, one of the officials said.
The official, who is not authorized to comment publicly, said it was believed the call came after the initial rounds of gunfire. The disclosure closely tracked an account provided earlier Sunday by California Rep. Adam Schiff, the ranking Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee. Schiff said that a Department of Homeland Security briefing indicated that Mateen had declared his support for the terrorist group before he died in a shootout with authorities.
Before Sunday's assault, Mateen's name had surfaced in a federal law enforcement investigation about three years ago, but it was not immediately clear whether his status was as a witness or a possible associate of a target in a larger inquiry.
Investigators were interviewing members of Mateen's family to try to learn what may have prompted the assault, one of the officials said.
NBC News reported that the suspect's father indicated that Mateen had expressed anti-gay sentiments.
The official also said investigators were reviewing Mateen's recent travels and contacts to learn more about possible preparations for the attack.
As part of the inquiry, authorities were tracing the origin of at least two weapons tied to the gunman, an AR-15 rifle and a handgun.
According to court records, Mateen was married in 2009 and divorced two years later.
Two of Mateen's acquaintances described the gunman's actions as out of character for the person they knew.
\"He would never shoot anybody or kill anybody,\" Lamont Owens said, adding that he had not seen Mateen for a few years.
Another associate, Ryan Jones, described Mateen as \"a cool, calm and collected person,\" he said.
Johnson reported from Washington
Credit: Kevin Johnson, USA TODAY, and Elliott Jones
Illustration
photo Joe Raedle, Getty Images
Word count: 417
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
