"The Dalai Lama led a silent prayer for victims of the mass shooting in Orlando as he promoted non-violent conflict resolution Monday.
The answer to attacks such as \"this latest tragedy, in some cases in the name of religion,\" is for young people to work daily, individually and in groups toward peace as a long-term goal, he said at the U.S. Institute of Peace.
The exiled Tibetan religious leader was in Washington to promote a worldwide \"peace building\" campaign, which he participated in by leading a workshop in India with 28 young activists from conflict zones around the world, especially from Africa and the Middle East.
Monday's event kicked off 100 days to the International Day of Peace on Sept. 21.
In the face of imminent violence, people have to first \"take appropriate action to save yourself (and) run away,\" he told USA TODAY. In the long term, society should incorporate \"warmheartedness\" and compassion in education, he said.
He referred to his decades living and working in India, in cooperation with Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Jews and Buddhists. Though many religions teach different philosophies, they all teach love and tolerance and helping others, he said. \"If someone creates bloodshed they should no longer be accepted in that religion.\"
Nancy Lindborg, president of the U.S. Institute of Peace, who organized and participated in the workshop, said it was the first time the Dalai Lama hosted so many young people from so many conflict zones.
The U.S. Institute of Peace supports the organizations that sent each activist with networking, training and facilities to help them share methods and learn to resolve conflict through mediation and other peaceful means.
Victoria Ibiwoye of Nigeria works with a group that helps vulnerable children in areas where Boko Haram is active in northern Nigeria. \"Deep down, everybody can love and show compassion,\" Ibiwoye said.
Credit: Oren Dorell, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo KC McGinnis, USA TODAY
Word count: 346
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
