"As investigators examine whether terrorism caused the crash of a Cairo-bound jet, many U.S. travelers take solace knowing commercial flights are often staffed by pairs of undercover federal air marshals, armed officers whose job is to stop terrorist acts such as a forcible takeover of an airplane.
But 55 years after the program's birth -- and nearly 15 years after its post-9/11 heyday, the air marshals program may be less omnipresent than many travelers expect -- and perhaps less effective.
EgyptAir Flight 804, which originated in Paris and plunged into the Mediterranean early Thursday, had three EgyptAir security personnel among the 66 people aboard the craft. Alain Vidalies, France's transport minister, said Thursday that the presence of three air marshals was the \"usual practice.\"
In the USA, there aren't enough air marshals to cover the thousands of flights that take off and land daily at U.S. airports.
Hard numbers are difficult to obtain -- federal officials wouldn't release any statistics on the program -- but during a congressional oversight hearing last summer, a lawmaker put the number of air marshals at about 4,000.
Thomas H. Kelly Jr., a Transportation Security Administration spokesman, told USA TODAY on Thursday that he couldn't comment on the number of air marshals in the skies, but he said in an email, \"Thousands of men and women fly each day on domestic and international flights to ensure the safety and security of the traveling public.\"
The National Air Traffic Controllers Association estimates that its members handle about 70,000 flights -- commercial, charter and military -- daily, and about 7,000 aircraft are in the air at any given time.
In 2014, John Casaretti, national president of the Air Marshal Association, told USA TODAY that air marshals \"cover a very small percentage of commercial flights,\" because placing two on each of about 30,000 daily flights would require more than 75,000 air marshals per day, considering the extra personnel required for training and days off.
Analysts choose which flights air marshals accompany, using a \"threat matrix,\" a computer program that assesses the probability of a threat based on the aircraft, departure and destination cities.
Credit: Greg Toppo, @gtoppo, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo TOM MIHALEK, AFP
Word count: 394
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
