"A Florida man who posted a Facebook rant threatening to kill gay people on Labor Day in a style he compared to the massacre at an Orlando nightclub and the killing of African-Americans by police officers has been arrested and charged with a federal crime, the F.B.I. said in a statement.
According to a criminal complaint released on Sunday by the F.B.I., Craig Allen Jungwirth, 50, a party promoter in Wilton Manors, Fla., wrote in a Facebook post early last week that his events were \"selling out\" because gay people were \"total patsies.\"
\"None of you deserve to live,\" he wrote, according to the complaint. \"If you losers thought the Pulse nightclub shooting was bad, wait till you see what I'm planning for Labor Day.\"
In other posts, using homophobic and racist slurs, he wrote that he had a \"solution to exterminate you losers,\" the complaint said.
Efforts on Sunday to contact Mr. Jungwirth or his lawyer for comment were unsuccessful.
Mr. Jungwirth was arrested on Saturday by the Florida Highway Patrol in Osceola County, south of Orlando, on a charge of driving with a suspended license, an unrelated episode, according to Michael D. Leverock, a spokesman for the F.B.I. in Miami.
Mr. Jungwirth has been charged with using interstate commerce to make threats, according to the federal complaint. He will appear in court on Tuesday, Mr. Leverock said.
The criminal complaint said Mr. Jungwirth had been the subject of complaints to the police in Wilton Manors, a small city with a large gay population roughly 30 miles north of Miami.
The accusations against Mr. Jungwirth come less than three months after Omar Mateen, 29, an Islamic State sympathizer, opened fire at Pulse, a gay nightclub in Orlando, killing 49 people and injuring 53 more. It was the largest mass killing of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people in American history and the deadliest act of terrorism on American soil since Sept. 11, 2001.
Word count: 335
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 5, 2016"
