"PARIS -- From the start, the subject hit too close to home. Out of security concerns in a country still in shock after the November terrorist attacks, \"Made in France,\" a French film about homegrown jihadists plotting strikes on downtown Paris, will head straight to video-on-demand this month and forgo release in cinemas.
\"I think it's the grown-up decision,\" said James Velaise, the president of Pretty Pictures, which picked up the film's French distribution when its original distributor dropped out after the January 2015 terrorist attacks against the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo and a kosher supermarket.
Directed by Nicolas Boukhrief, \"Made in France\" was shot in 2014 in the style of the police procedurals so popular on French television. It tells the story of a group of Islamic radicals, including a journalist who infiltrates them and acts as a police mole, and the tensions in the group leading up to a planned attack.
The film's French release was originally scheduled for Nov. 3, 2015, but was moved to Nov. 18 because too many other films were opening the first week of November. After the coordinated terrorist attacks of Nov. 13, the release of \"Made in France\" was postponed and posters for the film -- which showed a Kalashnikov superimposed against the Eiffel Tower -- were removed from the Paris subway system.
A new release was set for Wednesday. But Mr. Velaise said that last week he had decided to move the film straight to video on demand, with a Jan. 29 release date, after leading cinema chains in France had told him they worried for the safety of their employees if the film were to be shown in theaters.
\"I understand their concerns,\" Mr. Boukhrief said in a radio interview this week.
In an interview in Le Monde, Mr. Boukhrief said he got the initial spark for \"Made in France\" when he read about the case of Khaled Kelkal, a young French-Algerian man from the outskirts of Lyon who had become radicalized and was implicated in different attacks, including one against a commuter rail station in downtown Paris in 1995 that was claimed by the Armed Islamic Group of Algeria.
Mr. Boukhrief, who was born in Antibes in 1963 to an Algerian father and French mother, said he had also been struck by the case of Mohammed Merah, who attacked a Jewish school in Toulouse in 2012, killing seven, including several children and a French parachutist named Mohamed Farah Chamse-Dine.
\"That kid kills a soldier named Mohamed, and that happens to be my father's name,\" Mr. Boukhrief told Le Monde. \"Mohamed shoots Mohamed and both are French. Does that mean that integration is going so badly that today you're either a soldier or a jihadist?\" he added. \"Then Merah goes into a school and shoots 5-year-olds, and right then I decided to write the film.\"
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Word count: 505
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 16, 2016"
