"Dealing with extremism abroad and its spillover at home will present an enormously complex challenge for the next president. Over the last five years, conflicts in Syria and Iraq have continued to frustrate the United States diplomatically, sapped military resources and provided a breeding ground for Islamic State radicals, who have spread bloodshed and destruction in the region and the West.
The multidimensional nature of the problem was on full view this week: a cease-fire in the Syrian civil war seemed ready to collapse; American forces prepared to recapture Mosul from the Islamic State; and terrorist attacks occurred in New York, New Jersey and Minnesota. President Obama's successor will have to confront these threats and understand what connects them.
As Mr. Obama has discovered, there is no easy solution to any of these problems, not least the sources and consequences of extremism, which may account for the lack of a sustained discussion in the presidential campaign about how America should deal with the issues.
Hillary Clinton responded in an even-tempered fashion after the latest attacks in the United States last weekend. And she has advanced prescriptions for the Middle East, which mostly make sense, apart from a questionable idea for a no-fly zone in Syria, which Mr. Obama has rejected in part because it risks a confrontation with Russia.
Donald Trump has offered virtually nothing except fearmongering and notions that could make matters worse, including a proposal for \"extreme vetting\" that could prevent most Muslims from immigrating to America. Apart from its vindictiveness, such an approach can only help the extremists by fueling anti-American sentiment among moderate Muslims everywhere. Meanwhile, Mr. Trump claims he has a plan somewhere in his possession to defeat the extremists but refuses to divulge it, perhaps because he hasn't the foggiest idea of what to do.
With less than seven weeks to go before the election, here is the situation in the most contentious areas, abroad and at home.
IRAQ Mr. Obama seems to be making progress in Iraq, where about half the territory seized by the Islamic State has been reclaimed. Along with Iraqi and Kurdish troops, American forces are laying plans to recapture Mosul before Mr. Obama leaves office. Mosul is one of Iraq's largest cities and has been an ISIS stronghold since 2014.
Many ISIS leaders have been killed, but given the fact that thousands of ISIS fighters have been dug in for two years, the battle for Mosul is likely to be fierce. And even if the Americans get their Iraqi and Kurdish allies to work together on the ground, they will somehow have to contrive to keep Shiite militias backed by Iran out of the city to avoid tensions with the majority Sunnis who live there.
Such are the complexities of the struggle in Iraq, and even liberating Mosul would not end them. How does the American-backed coalition prevent Islamic State fighters from escaping and regrouping, ready to fight another day? What is to keep the city from again falling prey to extremists if the Shiite-led Iraqi government in Baghdad remains fractured and incapable of building a country in which Sunnis, Shiites and Kurds have equal rights? Can jobs, housing and basic services be found for Mosul's battered people? Can the next American president prevent the Kurds and their control of key oil and gas fields from becoming a new flash point?
SYRIA If anything, Syria's battlefield is even more confounding. There are overlapping wars: between President Bashar al-Assad and rebels; between an American-backed coalition and the Islamic State; between Turkey and the Kurds. Meanwhile, Russia and Iran are backing Mr. Assad with military power, while the United States and Sunni Arab states, like Saudi Arabia, are helping rebels, some of whom fight either in partnership with or in proximity to the affiliate of Al Qaeda known as the Nusra Front, now called the Levant Conquest Front, making it hard to tell the good guys from the bad.
The United States is bombing ISIS targets and deploying special forces as advisers for the moderate rebels, but Mr. Obama has largely resisted military involvement beyond that in what is essentially a sectarian civil war. On Wednesday, The Times reported that he is considering a plan to directly arm Syrian Kurdish fighters. This major shift could help speed up the offensive against the Islamic State while worsening tensions with Turkey. An estimated nearly half a million Syrians have died, mostly due to bombing by Assad forces.
In recent weeks, the Obama administration has pursued another cease-fire (an earlier partial cease-fire collapsed fairly quickly) that is intended to pave the way for humanitarian aid deliveries as well as broader negotiations on a political transition to end the war, slowly ease Mr. Assad out of power and allow the major combatants to focus their full attention on fighting the Islamic State and the Nusra Front. But success depends as much on Russia as on Mr. Assad. That was made clear on Monday by the bombing of a 31-truck relief convoy that had been promised safe passage under a cease-fire negotiated by Russia and the United States, killing at least a dozen people and destroying tons of humanitarian aid. The Obama administration blamed Moscow while continuing to insist that a cease-fire, however unlikely, could still be made to work. That seemed even less possible on Wednesday after at least four emergency medical workers were reported killed in airstrikes near Aleppo, an area where only Russia and Syria were flying airplanes.
Even if a durable cease-fire goes into effect and political transition negotiations commence in Syria, the Americans and their allies must still grapple with what to do with the millions of displaced Syrians and the foreign forces -- from Turkey, Iran, Russia and Hezbollah -- that are in the country. Also to be decided is whether to pursue war crimes charges against Mr. Assad, the Islamic State and some rebel groups for the atrocities committed against civilians during the war.
AT HOME The next president must also confront threats on American soil from extremists who enter this country to commit terrorist acts as well as from people living here who are not formally allied with terrorist groups in the Middle East but draw inspiration from their calls to violence and become radicalized. Authorities said that was the case of Ahmad Khan Rahami, who, before being charged in connection with the weekend bombings in Manhattan and at the Jersey Shore, invoked \"brother Osama bin Laden\" among other role models.
Since 9/11, local, state and federal law enforcement has thwarted the overwhelming majority of terrorist plots against the United States. Yet, attacks in cities like Boston, Orlando and San Bernardino have made many Americans fear that the threat is getting closer.
Neither Mrs. Clinton nor Mr. Trump has an answer for bombings that result from an individual's personal demons. Perhaps no one does. What's clear, though, is that the struggle against extremists has to be waged on multiple fronts -- ideological and cultural as well as military and diplomatic. To be successful, a president must be prepared to address them all.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
Credit: THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Word count: 1221
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 22, 2016"
