"Civilians caught in the advance on Fallujah by Iraq's military are being forced by the Islamic State to serve as \"human shields\" in areas where the militants expect airstrikes from a U.S.-led coalition, residents said Thursday.
\"The Islamic State began moving families living in the outskirts to the center,\" resident Salem al Halbusi said by telephone. \"They are locking some families down inside the hospital building.\"
Since Sunday, Iraqi military and militia forces have prepared to enter Fallujah, about 40 miles west of Baghdad, as airstrikes have pounded the militant-held city. The Iraqi government said that recapturing the city is key to stopping Islamic State attacks in the capital that have killed hundreds over the past few months.
The head of command for the province, Gen. Ismail al Mahlalwai, said the noose is tightening around the city. \"We killed around 100 (Islamic State) militants since Tuesday,\" he said.
Despite that progress, local police said in a statement that the Islamic State was creating obstacles that include booby traps and improvised explosive devices that would need to be cleared before ground troops can enter the city.
Meanwhile, the militants are squeezing civilians, residents and military officials said.
\"They are making people freak out by telling them, 'The army and militia are coming to kill you all,'\" al Halbusi said.
\"They claim they have achieved a big victory against Iraqi forces,\" he added. \"And they distributed some sweets for kids, trying to get people on their side.\"
Fallujah is largely a city of Sunnis, the same Muslim sect as the militants, while the government, armed forces and militias are composed mainly of Shiites. The militants, who captured the city in 2014 when they first swept into Iraq, have held the support of many Sunnis around the country by warning that the Shiites are their enemy.
So far, more than a dozen families have escaped Fallujah and have taken shelter with the Iraqi army, according to a Joint Operation Center statement. Most have been placed in a camp, and the men separated from their families as security forces question them.
Remaining residents say any civilian caught trying to escape or hanging a white flag to protect themselves during airstrikes are doing so under the threat of death.
Air Force Lt. Gen. Charles Brown said the coalition takes great care to minimize civilian casualties. Over the past 24 hours, coalition aircraft launched four strikes around Fallujah, targeting three Islamic State units, two tunnels, four vehicles, an artillery piece, a weapons cache and three fighting positions, U.S. Central Command announced Thursday.
Conditions in the city have steadily deteriorated, according to a United Nations report. \"We want the army to arrive soon to get us out of this prison,\" resident Abo Ahmad al Essawi said.
Contributing: Jim Michaels
in Washington, D.C.
Credit: Ammar Al Shamary, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo photos by AHMAD AL-RUBAYE, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 515
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
