"How significant was the Islamic State's role in the deadliest mass shooting in American history?
President Obama and FBI Director James Comey said Omar Mateen, the gunman responsible for dozens of deaths Sunday at a gay nightclub, was radicalized online -- but not directed -- by the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS.
Though the terrorist group may not have had its logistical or financial fingerprints on this attack, the Orlando shooting rampage will no doubt spur debate about whether Islamic State-inspired lone-wolf attackers have become the emerging security risk to the homeland.
To be certain, the lone wolf radicalized through a steady diet of disturbing extremist videos and social media is nothing new, and terrorist groups often take outsize credit for their roles.
In December, an Islamic State-inspired couple attacked a holiday party in San Bernardino, Calif., at the office where one of the suspects worked, killing 14. In 2009, an Army psychiatrist killed 13 in a shooting rampage at a military installation in Texas after being radicalized by online al-Qaeda propaganda.
Until fairly recently, much of U.S. law enforcement's attention on the Islamic State centered on the group's efforts to recruit young Muslims in the USA to fight in Syria.
This month, a federal jury in Minneapolis convicted three young men of Somali descent who authorities said were part of a group of a dozen young men -- the biggest U.S. plot seen to date -- conspiring to join the Islamic State and commit murders on its behalf.
During the trial, jurors were played secretly recorded audio of young men speaking appreciatively of videos of brutal killings by terrorists and chatting of their plan to leave the unbelievers of the USA behind and fight alongside the Islamic State.
As the trial opened, federal authorities reported that the danger of the Islamic State recruiting disaffected young American men, like those involved in the Minneapolis plot, to travel to Syria was diminishing while the threat of the lone wolf acting on U.S. soil was growing.
The Islamic State is losing control of territory in Syria and Iraq. As a result, its draw on the budding extremist to sign up for duty in the Middle East is fading. The FBI director confirmed last month that the agency was seeing far fewer Americans trying to make their way to the bloody war in Syria than a year ago.
Comey warned that the FBI encountered an uptick in the group's efforts on social media to recruit people sympathetic to its cause to carry out attacks on American soil. Last month, the agency reported that out of more than 1,000 open cases of suspected violent extremists in the USA, about 80% were believed to have drawn some inspiration from the Islamic State's appeals on social media.
The lone wolf is extremely difficult for authorities to detect.
Individuals like the Minneapolis plotters have to communicate with Islamic State contacts to put their plans in motion. By tracing online communication and with the help of an informant who recorded those involved in the conspiracy, the FBI grasped the contours of a plot to make it to Syria.
Lone wolves aiming to carry out attacks at home can keep their cards closer to the vest. \"We are looking for needles in a national haystack,\" Comey said.
The couple who killed 14 in San Bernardino weren't on the FBI's radar before they carried out their attack.
Before the Orlando carnage, the FBI investigated Mateen on two occasions -- once for making inflammatory comments to colleagues while working as a security contractor at a courthouse and once for connections to a Florida man who carried out a suicide attack in Syria. Agents found nothing to act on in either case and moved on.
Comey said the FBI will take a hard look to see whether there was something it should have done differently, but his early read was that the bureau had done all the right things.
For now, the FBI picks up the pieces while the country mourns. The bureau faces a tough balancing act of finding the next lone wolf before he strikes and diminishing the Islamic State's tangential role.
That task is truly as difficult as finding a needle in a haystack.
Madhani is a USA TODAY correspondent based in Chicago.
Credit: Aamer Madhani, @AamerISmad, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Andrew West, The (Fort Myers, fla.) News-Press
Word count: 771
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
