"WASHINGTON -- The Defense Department has informed Congress that it intends to transfer up to a dozen more prisoners from the military prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, a United States government official said late Wednesday.
The transfers would further whittle the number of prisoners, currently 91, held there, and move the United States closer to President Obama's long-held intention of closing the high-security facility before he leaves office next year. Yet significant challenges remain.
The Pentagon is required to give Congress 30 days' notice that security standards have been met to release prisoners. The government official provided no details on exactly when they would depart Cuba.
The government official was granted anonymity to discuss the plan because the administration does not officially confirm the transfers of prisoners before they occur.
Mr. Obama has sought to close the military prison since his first campaign for the White House eight years ago, but persistent opposition in Congress has foiled those plans. And with Mr. Obama in his final year in office, the prison is expected to extend beyond his presidency. His latest proposal to close it, submitted in February, was strongly opposed by Republicans.
The plan to transfer the next round of Guantánamo prisoners was first reported Wednesday by The Washington Post.
The Obama administration's main effort to close the prison has been transferring prisoners -- viewed as low-risk -- to countries that can meet security conditions, with the rest to be taken to a different prison on domestic soil. Among potential sites that the Pentagon has studied in the United States are military prisons in Fort Leavenworth, Kan., and Charleston, S.C., as well as the federal correctional complex in Florence, Colo., where a maximum-security prison houses many convicted terrorists.
But the fate of the plan is uncertain because of a statute banning the military from taking detainees from Guantánamo to the United States. The Republican-controlled Congress has shown little interest in revoking that law.
In light of that, the administration has moved to speed transfers in recent months as it enters its final year. In January, the Pentagon transferred 10 lower-level Yemeni prisoners to Oman.
When Mr. Obama in February announced the latest plan to close the detention facility, he noted that \"The politics of this are tough,\" adding: \"I don't want to pass this problem on to the next president, whoever it is. And if, as a nation, we don't deal with this now, when will we deal with it?\"
Word count: 422
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 31, 2016"
