"The Islamic State was able to carve out a sprawling territory across Iraq and Syria through military dominance over 126 key places. But the group's momentum has shifted over the past year, and it has lost its hold on many of those locations.
The group, also known as ISIS or ISIL, has lost about 45 percent of its land in Syria and 20 percent in Iraq since the peak of its control in August 2014, according to estimates by American officials.
The places shown here were identified by the IHS Conflict Monitor, an organization that has been tracking which cities and towns make up the militant group's territory.
A Timeline of Gains and Losses
Islamic State militants began taking control of places in Syria and Iraq at the end of 2013 and the beginning of 2014. The places are grouped here by the month they came under ISIS control.
A Month of Stunning Advances
In June 2014, the Islamic State stunned the
world when it made rapid advances across
the two countries and seized Mosul, Iraq's
second largest city, from soldiers who
dropped their weapons and fled.
Building on Their Gains
Within a month, the militants had full
control of another major Iraqi city,
Tikrit, and the nearby Baiji Refinery,
which once provided oil to 11 Iraqi
provinces. The refinery has not been
operational since.
Facing Resistance in Northern Syria
A fierce air and ground battle ensued after the militants captured Kobani, a key border town between Syria and Turkey. The group lost the town three months later, beginning a string of losses that gave the Kurds control of much of northern Syria.
Shifting to Defense
By the start of 2016 the Islamic State's momentum had slowed. The militants still managed some key victories, like the capture of the Ayyash Arms Depot in Syria, one of its largest weapons seizures to date.
The territory controlled by the Islamic State is roughly the size of South Carolina. Based on preconflict census data and government estimates, the places that the group has contested or controlled once had a combined population of at least 3.7 million people.
Illustration
GRAPHICS (Sources: IHS Conflict Monitor (places and control); street data from OpenStreetMap.) (A12-A13)
Word count: 389
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 3, 2016"
