"JERUSALEM -- The Israeli military said on Thursday that it had detained a soldier who shot a Palestinian assailant in the head as he lay motionless on the ground, an incident that drew outrage on social media networks and was condemned even by a military spokesman as \"a grave breach\" of the army's values and standards.
The episode began, the military said, on Thursday morning when two Palestinian men stabbed and wounded an Israeli soldier at a checkpoint near a Jewish settlement enclave in the West Bank city of Hebron, in what has become a near-daily occurrence in the last six months. The first announcement from the military was routine: \"Forces responded to the attack and shot the assailants, resulting in their deaths.\"
Later, graphic video footage emerged showing a soldier cocking his rifle and shooting one of the Palestinians for a second time as he lay on the road, after more than a minute in which other soldiers and an Israeli ambulance crew milled about in what appears as a calm, secure scene.
\"The I.D.F. views this incident as a grave breach of I.D.F. values, conduct and standards of military operations,\" Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, an army spokesman, said of the event, referring to the Israeli military. \"A military police investigation has commenced and the soldier involved has been detained.\"
Military officials said that the investigation began based on a report from the commander in the field, before the video surfaced and then rocketed around the Internet. The incident was the latest in a series that have fueled outrage among Palestinians and their supporters at what they see as Israel's excessive force in responding to the wave of stabbings, shootings and vehicular attacks that began in October.
About 30 Israelis, two Americans and a Palestinian bystander have been killed by Palestinians since the violent upsurge started. Israeli forces or civilians have shot dead 180 Palestinians during the same period, most of whom were either attempting attacks or were suspected of doing so.
Human-rights groups and others have accused Israeli security forces of shooting to kill even in instances like Thursday's, when the assailants did not appear to pose any imminent threat.
\"Today, we have the proof, the actual video of the soldier shooting the Palestinian youth in the head after he was shot and wounded and laying on the ground,\" said Hisham Sharabati of Al Haq, a Palestinian human-rights group. \"Now we will wait and see if the Israeli soldier will be prosecuted for his actions.\"
Sarit Michaeli, a spokeswoman for the Israeli rights organization B'tselem, said she thought that prosecution was unlikely, based on past experience. She said that for her, \"the most shocking thing about the video, aside from the action of the soldiers, is the callous indifference of the soldiers and officers and members of security forces around him.\"
Ms. Michaeli blamed \"the public climate in Israel,\" with \"virtually every politician condoning the notion\" that Palestinian attackers should be killed. \"You cannot but have an impact on the soldiers on the ground,\" she said.
Ms. Michaeli said there were suspicions in at least 12 other cases of Israeli soldiers using disproportionate force to kill Palestinian attackers.
Benjamin Malka, a lawyer representing the soldier, said he was still studying the case but suggested that the soldier had acted in the belief that the Palestinian on the ground still posed a potential threat. Ynet, a leading Hebrew news site, quoted the lawyer as saying, \"It is clear from the video clip that the terrorist moved and that he was wearing a jacket that could have concealed an explosive belt.\"
The video of the Hebron shooting was made by a Palestinian volunteer for B'tselem. The Palestinian who was shot for a second time was identified as Abed al-Fatah al-Sharif, 21. Video images appeared to show Mr. Sharif rolling his head from one side to the other about 90 seconds before he was shot again, suggesting he was alive.
Israel's defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, said in a video statement that the soldier's action \"completely contradicts I.D.F. values and its battle ethics; even in a moment of great anger we must not permit such unbridled and uncontrolled behavior.\" Israel, he said, will continue to use an \"iron hand against terrorists and those who send them,\" but he added: \"Woe unto us if we act contrary to our conscience and our moral values.\"
Questions have also arisen over the lack of medical treatment provided to the two Palestinians after they were initially shot. The military's chief spokesman, Brig. Gen. Moti Almoz, told Israel Radio, \"As far as the orders given to soldiers are concerned, the moment terrorists have been neutralized they are supposed to give medical treatment to the injured, even if they are terrorists.\"
Israeli leaders have vehemently rejected accusations that members of the military use excessive force, praising them -- and occasionally, armed guards and civilians -- for acting effectively and in legitimate self-defense.
But speaking to high school students last month amid the heightened tensions, Lt. Gen. Gadi Eisenkot, chief of staff of the Israeli military, reiterated the army's regulations for opening fire, urging caution and restraint.
The military, he said, \"must not speak in catchphrases such as 'whoever comes to slay you, slay him first,' or state that anyone holding a knife or a pair of scissors must be killed.\"
Credit: ISABEL KERSHNER; Diaa Hadid contributed reporting from Jerusalem and Rami Nazzal from the West Bank.
Photograph
Israeli Soldiers Stood Near the Body of One of the Palestinians Killed at a Checkpoint On Thursday. (Photograph by Hazem Bader/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 957
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 25, 2016"
