"I have evaluated a number of young Muslim men under charges of aiding the Islamic State terrorist group. I have also spent many months at Guantanamo with the so-called worst of the worst. There are many differences among them. Recently, the FBI nabbed another teenager for ties to ISIL. How dangerous is he? We just mourned slain police officers in Dallas and Baton Rouge. How did those perpetrators escape notice?
There are ways to understand -- and identify in advance -- people who commit horrendous violent acts. But I have yet to see those capabilities in the agencies entrusted to protect us from terrorism and violence.
Most Americans think of this as a conventional military problem. Yet it has much in common with public health challenges: How do we protect communities and families against disease and other threats to health and welfare? How do we find the key individual or representative case? Similarly, how can neighborhoods best shield themselves from violence and violent extremism? How can law enforcement agencies best track down potential killers?
ISIL recruits
The Fordham Center on National Security has identified many traits found in the men and women recruited by ISIL. For a start, they are overwhelmingly young, disillusioned and impulsive, and they live on the margins of both Western and Muslim societies. The violent perpetrators are older than the younger non-violent majority. These observations and others help generally orient law enforcement, but they do not zero in on the potential killers in our communities.
The Consortium for Risk-Based Firearm Policy outlines another way in an extensive 2013 report compiling the best evidence on risk for committing violence. The risk factors include domestic violence and abuse, a record of violent misdemeanors, and drug and alcohol abuse.
The Orlando shooter, Omar Mateen, is a case study of how such information might have helped authorities. His teachers noted his rudeness and aggressiveness; he was unable to focus or control himself in class. His first wife filed for divorce to escape physical and emotional abuse. His co-workers were so alarmed by his temperament and talk about violence that they reported him to his superiors, and he was reassigned.
The FBI had investigated Mateen as a possible terrorist because of connections to an acquaintance from his mosque who carried out a suicide bombing in Syria. The inquiry was dropped after investigators concluded that Mateen had only a casual acquaintance with the perpetrator. The troubling personal part of his record, however, would have alerted mental health clinicians and observers to the risks Mateen presented. It should have also alerted the FBI.
History of violence
ISIL also claimed credit for the truck attack in Nice, France, but the driver had a history of petty crime and psychiatric problems. If he was radicalized, it happened in the last weeks of his life.
The focus on ISIL and fighting in the Middle East confuses our tactics and strategy. As in public health, an effective program involves multiple courses of action.
At the broadest level, we need to counter the message of ISIL recruiters and weaken the ISIL fighters in the combat zone.
At the individual level, we need more accurate identification and characterization of potential perpetrators. It should be standard procedure in preliminary investigations to look at an individual's history of violence, criminality and impulsivity.
I have found that the worry about ISIL distracts from considerations of the mental state and potential for violence of the subject. Our agencies apprehend and jail men who have no history of violence and miss those who do. The FBI sends undercover agents to target young men and women chatting about traveling to Syria on Facebook. Meanwhile, the shooters in Orlando, Chattanooga and San Bernardino fall off their radar screens or were never on them.
As important as they are, the bigger social issues -- such as race -- also distract us from finding shooters like Micah Johnson, who killed five police officers in Dallas. Johnson had been discharged from the Army after being charged with sexual harassment. He frightened the women around him and was considered dangerous. He entered into public chat rooms and was outspoken about violence. The pattern looks like the so-called ISIL terrorists: threatening and edgy.
Certainly inequality, racism and terrorism matter, but to paraphrase the 1992 Clinton campaign mantra, it's the violence.
Stephen N. Xenakis, a child and adolescent psychiatrist, is a retired Army brigadier general.
Illustration
photo Joe Raedle, Getty Images
Word count: 775
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
