"KANDAHAR, Afghanistan -- Ten police officers in the southern Afghan province of Oruzgan were poisoned by a rogue colleague and shot in the head by Taliban fighters the officer was working with, the second insider attack on the police in the province in less than two weeks, officials said Tuesday.
The recent insider attacks have added to the woes of an Afghan security force that suffered record casualties in the past year as the Taliban mounted strong offensives across the country, stretching the government's fighters thin. Officials say the situation in several districts of Oruzgan is fragile, as it is in neighboring Helmand Province, with government operations unable to break the Taliban momentum.
The latest attack occurred late Monday night in the Chermistan area of the Chinarto district, said Faiz Mohammad, the district chief. A police officer who had forged ties with the Taliban poisoned the 10 officers and invited Taliban fighters to the post; they then shot the poisoned men in the head, he said.
\"They burned the check post and a police vehicle, and also took the weapons with them,\" Mr. Mohammad said. \"The police officer who paved the way for the Taliban managed to escape with the Taliban.\"
Rahimullah Khan, Oruzgan's deputy police chief, said the 10 officers had been killed after an exchange of fire. A team has been assigned to investigate the episode, he said.
A Taliban spokesman also said the outpost had fallen to militants after a midnight assault that involved heavy weapons.
\"The Taliban carried out a tactical attack, plus received help from inside,\" said the spokesman, Qari Yousuf Ahmadi. \"This is not the work of one individual to kill and confiscate weapons and demolish the check post.\"
But Dost Mohammad Nayab, a spokesman for the governor of Oruzgan, said that initial information showed that the officers had first been poisoned by the rogue policeman.
\"It might also be the case that on his night duty, when the other police went to sleep, he turned his gun against sleeping policemen and shot them all and managed to escape,\" Mr. Nayab said.
In a similar episode on Jan. 17, nine officers were killed in the district of Dehrawoud. After shooting their colleagues, three officers -- also believed to be Taliban infiltrators -- took weapons, burned the post and joined the insurgents, according to Dehrawoud's district governor, Aminullah Khaliqi.
Oruzgan has faced major Taliban offensives in recent months, with intense battles and a lack of ammunition and support often compelling Afghan security forces to abandon their posts. The security situation worsened after the assassination in March of the province's powerful police chief, Matiullah Khan.
Mohammad Karim Khadimzai, head of the provincial council in Oruzgan, said the districts of Khas Oruzgan, Gizab, Dehrawoud and Shahid Hasas had been surrounded by the Taliban for months. The main roads to the districts are blocked by the militants, making resupply and reinforcement difficult, he said.
\"Dehrawoud district is deteriorating because it has an open border with Helmand Province and is always threatened by the Taliban,\" Mr. Khadimzai said.
The security situation in Helmand has drawn as many as 1,000 security officials to the area in recent days, said Bashir Ahmad Shakir, head of the security committee at the Helmand council. The Taliban are fighting for several districts surrounding the province center, Lashkar Gah.
As the insurgents reached the gates of Lashkar Gah, American and British special forces rushed to assist the Afghans in defending it. The loss of the city, cleared at great cost to American and British forces, would be a huge symbolic blow to NATO.
Last week, alarmed by the lack of progress in Helmand and by the disorder in the government ranks, President Ashraf Ghani put Abdul Jabar Qahraman, a lawmaker and a senior military officer during the Communist era, in charge of operations there.
\"He seems to be coming with full authority from Kabul and eager to restore the situation,\" Mr. Shakir said.
Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here .
Credit: TAIMOOR SHAH and MUJIB MASHAL; Taimoor Shah reported from K andahar, and Mujib Mashal from Kabul, Afghanistan.
Word count: 714
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 27, 2016"
