"In \"Eye in the Sky,\" a thriller about a secret drone operation against terrorists in Kenya, it doesn't take long for the characters to land in a moral minefield.
A long-planned mission to capture a radicalized Englishwoman, who is meeting with members of the Shabab Islamist extremist group in Nairobi, is thrown off course when it becomes clear preparations for a suicide-bombing attack are underway.
[Read a review of \"Eye in the Sky.\"]
The British colonel in charge of the operation (Helen Mirren) urges that the objective be changed from \"capture\" to \"kill.\" Her superior (Alan Rickman) agrees. As British politicians debate the repercussions of killing one of their own citizens, an American drone pilot (Aaron Paul) spies a complicating factor: a young girl, selling bread her mother has made, has wandered into the kill zone.
As the film ricochets among London, Nairobi, Nevada, Singapore, Beijing and Hawaii, what ensues is not just a game of bureaucratic buck-passing. It's a nuanced grappling with the ethics of modern warfare. Does killing a suspected terrorist by unmanned aircraft constitute extrajudicial execution? What qualifies as an imminent threat? And is saving the lives of 80 people who could perish in a suicide attack worth the death of an innocent girl and the anger of the local population?
Drone warfare -- and the knotty political and moral issues that accompany it -- has increasingly piqued the interest of filmmakers, TV writers and playwrights. Last month, \"The Good Wife\" returned to the topic, devoting a large chunk of an episode to a debate over the legality of adding an ISIS recruiter who is an American citizen to the kill list. And \"National Bird,\" a documentary about drone program whistle-blowers by Sonia Kennebeck, will play at the Tribeca Film Festival next month.
It's not hard to understand why drones make for compelling fare.
\"They're flying robots,\" said Arthur Holland Michel, co-founder of the Center for the Study of the Drone at Bard College. \"They're used by spies acting on orders that come directly from the president. They're operated by former jet pilots living in Las Vegas, who feel the psychological toll of what they're doing even though they're not in danger. And they rain missiles called Hellfire on Al Qaeda, the Taliban and also, every so often, women, children and other civilians. How could the public not be fascinated and terrified by drones?\"
This combustible mix of awe and fear has led to some fanciful depictions in entertainment. In \"The Bourne Legacy,\" from 2012, Jeremy Renner's character shoots down a drone in the Alaskan wilderness with a rifle before it can obliterate him. And that's not even the most unbelievable part: The drone was operating in stormy weather and swooping low to the ground through a valley, two abilities the current generation of unmanned aircraft does not possess.
In a more realistic approach, the Season 4 premiere of \"Homeland,\" in 2014, explored the consequences of collateral damage when a drone strike ordered by Carrie Mathison (Claire Danes) takes out a Taliban leader but kills 40 civilians at a wedding in Pakistan in the process.
Last spring, George Brant's play \"Grounded\" had a critically acclaimed run at the Public Theater in New York, with Anne Hathaway as a drone pilot haunted by waging war half a world away by remote control. And Andrew Niccol's \"Good Kill,\" released last May, also grappled with drone warfare's moral quandaries by focusing on the downward spiral of an Air Force pilot (Ethan Hawke), who blasts enemies in Afghanistan and Yemen to smithereens from a metal hut in the Nevada desert.
The new film \"Eye in the Sky\" takes a more wide-angled view of the issues. The English writer Guy Hibbert (\"Five Minutes of Heaven\") began researching drone warfare about seven years ago, before the issue began to permeate the public consciousness. The spark: his imaging of what happens when \"some glorified toy, 20,000 feet up in the air\" fires and the \"horrific disconnect for the victims below.\"
A producer at the BBC, a friend of his, commissioned a script, and Mr. Hibbert began talking to British Army and Air Force officers (including some who worried that this new form of warfare was unfolding without any debate in Parliament), politicians and human rights lawyers. After being told about the \"kill chain\" -- the elements (and players) involved in the selection, vetting and dispatching of targets -- Mr. Hibbert found his dramatic instincts kicking in.
Finding financing, however, was a struggle. It took nearly four years before an escalation of the United States drone program moved the subject onto the front pages and the production company of Ged Doherty, a British former music executive, and the actor Colin Firth took on the $13 million project.
Mr. Hibbert's kaleidoscopic approach, one that painted in shades of gray, resonated with the director, Gavin Hood (\"Rendition,\" \"Tsotsi\").
\"It doesn't take a smug or easy position,\" Mr. Hood said. \"It doesn't profess to have the perfect answer, but it sure gives you an emotional, visceral sense of what it's like to be in the shoes of very many different people involved in this warfare.\"
Mr. Hood, who served two years in the South African Marines more than 30 years ago, then embarked on a fact-finding mission of his own, speaking to military intelligence officers, drone pilots, defense contractors and others.
Mr. Hood's major alteration involved Ms. Mirren's character. In the original script, the colonel was a man. But \"I didn't want to make a guy's war movie,\" Mr. Hood said. \"The themes and ideas of the movie should be discussed by all of us, regardless of gender.\"
Enticed by the multiple-viewpoint story, told in real time, that explored the realistic life-and-death compromises of war in an age of terrorism, Ms. Mirren signed on.
\"To me, it's kind of like a courtroom drama, only the audience is the jury,\" wrestling with the right and wrong of it while leaving the theater, Ms. Mirren said.
\"That's what one really hopes come out of this movie,\" she added. \"Not assumption, but discussion.\"
Ms. Kennebeck, an investigative journalist making her first feature-length film with \"National Bird,\" also hopes to spark conversation with her narrower focus.
The stories of three former United States Air Force personnel in the drone program serve as the backbone of the documentary, which counts Wim Wenders and Errol Morris as its executive producers. \"I wanted to talk to the people on the inside,\" Ms. Kennebeck said, not experts and other talking heads.
Heather, a former imagery analyst, now receives disability benefits for post-traumatic stress disorder, even though she was thousands of miles away from the strikes. Daniel, a former signals intelligence analyst, has become an antiwar campaigner. And Lisa, a former technical sergeant in the Air Force drone program, is so disturbed and conflicted by what she witnessed remotely, she travels to Afghanistan to meet civilian survivors of a strike gone awry. (That incident resulted in the deaths of 23 civilians, according to the United States military.)
One of the prime attractions of drone warfare is its precision -- enabling the country to \"kill the people who are trying to kill us,\" as President Obama has told his aides, with minimal collateral damage. But if the intelligence is not accurate, the most robust protocols to prevent civilian casualties do not matter, and the moral superiority of such warfare claimed by its proponents can be tarnished.
Independent investigations have tallied many more civilian casualties than the administration, which has shrouded the drone program in secrecy, will concede. The Bureau of Investigative Journalism, a nonprofit based at City University London, has found that an estimated 423 drone strikes in Pakistan since 2004 have killed between 2,497 and 3,999 people. Of these, between 423 and 965 have been civilians.
Winning the hearts and minds of the local population is the core of counterinsurgency philosophy. But how does the West succeed if the drone attacks make the ground only more fertile for the enemy?
\"That to me is the key debate here,\" Mr. Hood said. \"Are we engaged any longer in counterinsurgency, or are we simply engaged in a game of whack-a-mole? And when you whack the mole, do you have one less mole, or do another 20 moles pop up?\"
Illustration
­PHOTOS: Top, Helen Mirren in the thriller \"Eye in the Sky,\" which grapples with the quandaries of modern warfare. Left, Phoebe Fox and Aaron Paul in the film. Right, an American neighborhood as seen from on high in the documentary \"National Bird.\" (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KEITH BERNSTEIN/BLEECKER STREET; TORSTEN LAPP/TEN FORWARD FILMS)
Word count: 1452
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 13, 2016"
