"JERUSALEM -- Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.'s two-day visit to Israel and the Palestinian territories was expected to be one of public pleasantries and private talks on regional energy and a new military aid package for Israel. Instead, he stepped into a bloody maelstrom.
In an unusually stinging critique on Wednesday, Mr. Biden said the United States not only deplored the recent wave of Palestinian attacks, including the fatal stabbing attack that killed an American graduate student soon after Mr. Biden landed, but also \"condemns the failure to condemn these acts.\" It appeared to be a veiled reference to the silence of President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority, whom Mr. Biden met hours later.
Mr. Biden made the pointed statement as he stood beside Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, one day after a Palestinian man fatally stabbed Taylor Force, 28, an American combat veteran and a first-year M.B.A. student at Vanderbilt University, and wounded several other tourists and Israelis.
\"Let me say in no uncertain terms: The United States of America condemns these acts and condemns the failure to condemn these acts,\" Mr. Biden said, adding, \"This cannot be viewed by civilized leaders as an appropriate way in which to behave.\"
Mr. Netanyahu said that \"unfortunately President Abbas has not only refused to condemn these terrorist attacks, his Fatah party actually praised the murderer of this American citizen as a Palestinian martyr and a hero.\"
Palestinian leaders blame growing popular anger over Israeli policies and the lack of any formal peace process for the violence.
During Mr. Biden's meeting with Mr. Abbas later Wednesday in the West Bank city of Ramallah, Mr. Abbas conveyed his condolences to Mr. Biden for the death of Mr. Force, according to Wafa, the official Palestinian news agency, but he also emphasized that some 200 Palestinians had been killed in recent months by the Israeli authorities. Mr. Abbas apparently did not mention that most of them were killed while they were carrying out attacks or were suspected of attempting attacks against Israelis.
Mr. Abbas also told Mr. Biden that \"restoring hope and providing a political horizon was the key to security, peace and stability\" and that Israel's continued settlement construction and perpetuation of the occupation were the causes of the violence and bloodshed, Wafa reported.
Mr. Biden's visit came against the backdrop of simmering tensions between the government of Mr. Netanyahu and the White House: Mr. Netanyahu canceled a meeting with President Obama, and there are unresolved differences over a new Memorandum of Understanding for military aid for Israel, potentially worth more than $40 billion over 10 years.
The package is viewed as a way to compensate Israel after the United States pressed for the nuclear deal with Iran over Israeli objections. But there are gaps between Washington and Jerusalem over the amount of aid and other issues, and Mr. Netanyahu recently suggested that he might prefer to wait for the next president. Mr. Biden urged the Israelis to sign the memorandum while Mr. Obama was still in office, the Israeli news media reported, citing unidentified Israeli officials.
Israeli experts said that both sides now have an interest in wrapping up the deal as soon as possible, citing American budgetary constraints that are unlikely to change and the volatile situation in the Middle East.
\"A new administration will take many months until people get settled into their offices,\" said Zalman Shoval, a former Israeli ambassador to the United States, \"and there is always an element of continuity anyway.\"
Mr. Biden said that the Obama administration had \"done more to help bolster Israel's security than any other administration in history\" and that it was committed to ensuring that Israel could maintain its \"qualitative edge\" militarily and would have the resources to do so.
The spike in deadly attacks in recent months, including multiple stabbings Tuesday night along a seaside promenade in Jaffa, where the American graduate student was killed, highlighted the tense environment in the absence any political negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians. Israelis fear that the lack of diplomacy could push Mr. Obama to lay down the outlines of an agreement for the establishment of a Palestinian state alongside Israel in the final leg of his term without talks.
\"The status quo has to break somewhere along the line, in terms of a two-state solution,\" Mr. Biden said in Jerusalem, cautioning that security measures alone would not stop the violence.
\"Even though it may be hard to see the path ahead, we continue to encourage all sides to take steps to move back toward the path of peace,\" he added.
Mr. Netanyahu made it clear that he did not think this was the time to advance Palestinian statehood, citing \"the persistent incitement in Palestinian society that glorifies murderers of innocent people and calls for a Palestinian state not to live in peace with Israel, but to replace Israel.\"
Photograph
President Mahmoud Abbas in Ramallah, Awaiting Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.'S Arrival. (Photograph by Atef Safadi/European Pressphoto Agency)
Word count: 857
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 10, 2016"
