"MOSCOW -- A suicide bomber blew himself up inside the Chinese Embassy's compound in Bishkek, the capital of Kyrgyzstan, on Tuesday morning, wounding three Kyrgyz staff members, according to local officials.
The attacker rammed the gates of the embassy with a Mitsubishi Delica that exploded about 160 feet into the compound. The driver died on the scene.
\"This was a suicide bomber, three people got injured, they were hospitalized,\" Zhenish Razakov, the country's deputy prime minister, told journalists in a video that was released by a local news website.
The three wounded people were Kyrgyz employees of the embassy, the news agency Interfax reported.
Kyrgyzstan's government, in a statement, called the attack \"a terrorist act.\" The statement said the government would discuss enhanced security measures ahead of the national holiday on Wednesday, which will celebrate 25 years of independence from what was then the Soviet Union.
The state security service in Kyrgyzstan has begun an investigation, in an effort to identify the bomber. According to preliminary data, he was a Uighur, a Turkic ethnic group, living in Eastern and Central Asia, the local news website K-News reported.
Uighur separatists in the Xinjiang region of far western China have called for the government in Beijing to recognize their independence and to stop suppressing their culture, language and religious traditions. Beijing has said that it offers the Uighurs a wide range of freedoms, including economic development, and it called the separatists terrorists.
In 2014, border guards in Kyrgyzstan killed 11 people believed to be from a Uighur militant group that had illegally crossed the border from China.
Photographs from the scene in Bishkek showed debris scattered around the embassy's courtyard buildings, which were damaged by the explosion. The police cordoned off the compound and the surrounding area.
In Beijing, a spokeswoman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry confirmed that three members of its embassy's staff in Bishkek had been wounded.
\"The Foreign Ministry has immediately responded and asked the Kyrgyzstan side to take all effective measures to ensure the safety of Chinese institutions and personnel in the country, and to have a prompt and thorough investigation for the truth of the attack, and severely punish the attackers,\" Hua Chunying, the spokeswoman, said at a news conference.
Members of the embassy were evacuated after the explosion, the news website 24Kg.org reported.
Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.
AuthorAffiliation
IVAN NECHEPURENKO Follow Ivan Nechepurenko on Twitter @INechepurenko.
Photograph
Officers in Bishkek, the Capital, After a Suicide Bomber Rammed the Chinese Embassy's Gates. (Photograph by Vladimir Voronin/Associated Press)
Word count: 472
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 31, 2016"
