"British health worker convicted of being Isis member and encouraging acts of terror on social media said she only wanted to live under sharia law
She was a bright, successful student who loved reality television shows and bands like the Spice Girls. Friends of Tareena Shakil describe her as fun-loving and caring young woman while her family have said they did not consider her particularly religious.
Over the past few weeks, a jury at Birmingham crown court has heard the extraordinary story of how Shakil, a 26-year-old health worker, struck up online friendships with members of Islamic State before travelling with her young child to Syria via Turkey.
On Friday, that same jury found her guilty of being an Isis member and encouraging acts of terror on social media.
The jury were told how -- by her own account -- she spent two months living in a mansion with other women of various nationalities waiting to be found husbands among Isis fighters, but became disillusioned and somehow managed to dodge her way back across the border.
That Shakil went to Syria is not in dispute. The crux of the case was why.
She insisted she went simply because she wanted to live under sharia law and had believed reports of Isis atrocities had been exaggerated by western media. The prosecution argued she knew full well what she was getting into, and had joined Isis and encouraged acts of terrorism by sending messages via social media glorifying the group and calling for people to fight for it.
The jury was told Shakil began to research Syria and speak to Isis members via social media in 2014 after the breakdown of her marriage. She exchanged messages with an Isis fighter who told her that she would go to hell if she stayed in the UK and had to move to live under sharia law. She sent a tweet to Sally-Anne Jones, a British woman who went to Syria after marrying an Isis fighter, telling her: \"I wish I was there.\"
She added an Isis flag to her Facebook profile and sent out social media messages apparently supportive of the group that included images of Isis fighters and religious passages justifying the group's actions.
Her defence barrister, Tim Moloney QC, said she had been \"groomed\" by Isis recruiters who had preyed on her vulnerability following the collapse of her marriage.
Certainly she had made the contacts that would help her get to Syria and on 20 October 2014, after telling friends she was going on a beach holiday, she and her child flew from East Midlands airport to Turkey. Once there, the pair headed to the city of Gaziantep, close to the Syrian border, where she was put up in an apartment by Isis representatives.
The next morning there was a knock on the door and she and a few other women were told: \"Get your things, you're going.\" They were driven across the border into Syria and taken to a farmhouse where women from France, Qatar, Trinidad and the Philippines were staying. She was moved again, this time to Raqqa, Isis's de facto capital, where she and her child were housed with others in a walled \"mansion\" described to her as the former governor's house.
She told the court: \"The house was the biggest I have ever seen. When I walked in I saw more than 30 women who turned and looked at me like I was a stranger. A Saudi Arabian woman called Umm Khalid walked down the stairs, I will never forget it. She was like the queen of the house and everyone was her servant. People brought food for her and did whatever she said. She was evil, vicious.
\"She ordered us to hand over our phones and iPads and told us what would be expected of us in terms of womanly duties such as cooking and cleaning.\"
Over the next few weeks Shakil sent messages home telling family and friends she was settled and happy. In one message, she said \"this is my jihad\" and urged people to take up arms for Isis. In a WhatsApp conversation with her father, she wrote: \"I can leave, but I don't want to. I want to die here as a martyr.\" Photographs of her showed her posing with an AK-47 rifle and her child wearing an Isis balaclava.
In court, she said Isis minders had told her what to say and had forced her to pose with the rifle. She had had no choice. \"I was one woman alone in the most dangerous place in the world -- 4,000 miles from home -- around some of the most dangerous people in the world. And I don't want sympathy for that, because it was my decision to go there. But there's no police there for me to ring to help.\" Oddly, she told the court she had put her child in an Isis balaclava because the toddler enjoyed wearing hats.
Shakil denied that she had married an Isis fighter and told the court that before she went to Syria she had believed that the accounts of the atrocities committed by its fighters were \"bad press\".
When the reality of life in Syria hit she became disillusioned and frightened, Shakil said. She said that on 6 January she had left the mansion with her child and a bag containing blankets and nappies and had bribed a taxi driver $50 to take her to the border.
She told the court: \"We luckily managed to make it through without being stopped and when we got to within a kilometre of the Turkish border I told him to stop and let me out. I threw the money at him and ran across a field to a barbed wire fence.
\"There were three Isis fighters standing nearby but they had their backs to us and didn't see us running, but they were so close. The barbed wire was shallow and we were able to get over.\"
Shakil flew back to the UK and was arrested by British police at Heathrow. She told police she had been kidnapped but in court accepted that this had been a lie. However, asked if she meant to encourage acts of terrorism, Shakil insisted: \"For me, what it was about was living a Muslim life. I just wanted to live an Islamic life, not to kill anybody.\"
Credit: Steven Morris
Word count: 1049
(Copyright , Guardian Newspapers Limited, Jan 29, 2016)"
