"MOSCOW -- Russian lawmakers adopted on Friday a set of measures that proponents said were aimed at combating terrorism, but that human rights activists condemned as an assault on freedoms of speech, privacy and conscience.
The measures, passed on Friday by the State Duma, Russia's lower house of Parliament, introduced a prison sentence of up to one year for failure to report a terrorist act or armed mutiny in the planning stages. The lawmakers also forced cellular and internet providers to store all communications data for six months and to help security services decipher all messaging applications.
The bill, which must be approved by the upper chamber and signed by President Vladimir V. Putin, also banned proselytizing, preaching and praying outside officially recognized religious institutions, among other measures.
The measures, called the Yarovaya Law after their main proponent, Irina A. Yarovaya, were putatively put forward as a reaction to the October bombing of a Russian passenger jet over the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt, which killed all 224 people aboard.
But leading Russian human rights activists said the authorities were using the air disaster as a pretext for an assault on basic freedoms. Tanya Lokshina, the Russia program director for Human Rights Watch, called the bill \"a set of legislative amendments that severely undermine freedom of expression, freedom of conscience and the right to privacy.\"
Russian communications companies complained that the new legislation would force them spend billions of dollars to build the infrastructure to store the messages, while religious organizations said the amendments could bar them from conducting services and other events outside their religious buildings.
In its initial form, the legislation was even harsher, allowing the government to strip Russians of their citizenship if convicted of committing a terrorist act, serving in a foreign army or working for a foreign security service or court.
Word count: 316
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 25, 2016"
