"LONDON -- A member of the Islamic State extremist group who was part of a notorious quartet that orchestrated the beheadings of Western hostages in Syria has been identified, according to news reports.
The man, Alexanda Kotey, 32, is thought to be half Ghanaian and half Cypriot. He was part of the group nicknamed the Beatles, led by the Islamic State's most infamous executioner, Mohammed Emwazi, better known as Jihadi John. Mr. Emwazi was killed in an American airstrike in November.
American officials could not be immediately reached to confirm the reports, which were published on Sunday by The Washington Post and BuzzFeed. A spokeswoman for Britain's Home Office said she could \"neither confirm nor deny\" the reports.
The group is believed to have killed the American journalists James Foley and Steven J. Sotloff, and their beheadings were captured on videos in which Mr. Emwazi was seen reading a statement criticizing President Obama and the American military operation against the Islamic State in Iraq. The captors also beheaded the American aid worker Abdul-Rahman Kassig, previously known as Peter, as well as two Britons and a Japanese hostage.
According to the reports, Mr. Kotey, a father of two and a convert to Islam, left Britain in 2009 and traveled to the Gaza Strip in an aid convoy organized by a British politician, George Galloway, who is known for his opposition to the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, as well as for his criticism of Israel.
Mr. Kotey attended the Manaar Mosque in West London, as did Mr. Emwazi, the reports said, and was involved in a network of Islamic extremists based in West London and known as the London Boys. But it was unclear when Mr. Kotey had traveled to Syria, how he had become involved with the Islamic State and precisely how he had met Mr. Emwazi.
Saleha Islam, the director of the Manaar Mosque, told ITV News that she was aware that some people who had joined the terrorist organization were from the West London neighborhood, Ladbroke Grove, where Mr. Kotey and Mr. Emwazi had lived.
But she rejected suggestions that the mosque had radicalized the men.
\"Al-Manaar is a center where we have up to 3,000 people attending every week,\" Ms. Islam said, adding that the mosque was open to everyone and that it did not keep tabs on who attended services.
\"The suggestion that the mosque has radicalized young men shows how ignorant people are of Islam and how mosques work.\"
Word count: 426
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 8, 2016"
