"The Department of Homeland Security announced Thursday that it had opened an investigation into complaints by a Transportation Security Administration manager who said he was instructed to provide the names of Somali-American leaders visiting the agency's office in Minnesota so they could be screened against national security databases for terrorist ties.
The department's Office of Inspector General said it would look into allegations made by Andrew Rhoades, an assistant federal security director at Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport that he was advised by his supervisor, David McMahon, to check potential Somali visitors to the agency's offices with the field intelligence officer to determine \"if we want them in our office space or meet elsewhere.\"
The public disclosure of the comments by Mr. McMahon quickly drew accusations of racial profiling.
Somali leaders in Minnesota condemned the remarks, saying the episode would damage outreach efforts by the T.S.A. and other federal agencies, and called for an inquiry. Members of Minnesota's congressional delegation, Representative Keith Ellison and Senator Al Franken, both Democrats, followed quickly with their own requests for an investigation by Homeland Security.
Jaylani Hussein, a Somali-American who is the executive director of the Minnesota chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations, said he welcomed the action by the inspector general.
Mr. Rhoades, who works with Somalis in the Twin Cities area, said he also welcomed the investigation.
\"The sad part is that those on any list really require my help to address any misunderstandings as to why they are receiving such scrutiny,\" he said. \"I cannot build good will and demonstrate a genuine desire to help if they are not wanted in my office.\"
The inspector general's office said it would make the report public after the inquiry ends.
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.
Word count: 320
Copyright New York Times Company May 6, 2016"
