"SYDNEY, Australia -- A teenager who plotted to run over and behead a police officer during a holiday parade in Melbourne last year was sentenced on Monday to 10 years in jail.
Sevdet Ramadan Besim, 19, of Hallam, a suburb of Melbourne in the state of Victoria, pleaded guilty in June to planning or preparing for a terrorist act on the holiday, Anzac Day, in 2015. He faced a maximum sentence of life in prison.
Anzac Day, held every April 25, marks the landing of Australian and New Zealand forces in Turkey during the Gallipoli campaign of World War I. Last year was the centenary of the landing, and hundreds of thousands of Australians planned to gather for dawn services around the country to honor the battle in which many soldiers lost their lives.
Victoria's Supreme Court heard that Mr. Besim plotted online with a 14-year-old British boy who lived in Blackburn, in northwestern England, to run down and behead the officer. He also discussed loading a kangaroo with explosives, painting it with an Islamic State symbol and setting it free in the city. Mr. Besim was arrested in police counterterrorism raids in Melbourne a week before the plot was to be carried out.
The British boy was sentenced in a Manchester court in October to at least five years in prison after pleading guilty to inciting terrorism overseas. His name was withheld because of his age.
The police said Mr. Besim was motivated by an extreme ideology and had expressed support for a terrorist organization. His friend Abdul Numan Haider, a terrorism suspect, was shot and killed outside a suburban Melbourne police station in September 2014 after lunging at two officers with a knife.
Mr. Besim's lawyer, George Georgiou, said on Monday after the sentencing hearing that Mr. Besim was young and had been influenced by older extremists. He has been held in jail since his arrest.
Justice Michael Croucher described the plan as evil but said that Mr. Besim's prospects for rehabilitation appeared good. He will be eligible for release in seven and a half years.
Word count: 359
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 6, 2016"
