"The battle to drive the Islamic State terrorist group out of Mosul, Iraq's second largest city, is well underway. It's shaping up to be just the bloody, grinding urban warfare military leaders long predicted. The latest horror is that militants are arming children, even forcing them to execute citizens.
ISIL fighters might still break and run under the onslaught of U.S.-trained Iraqi and Kurdish fighters, much as they did during the recapture of two other Iraqi cities, Fallujah and Ramadi, in the past year. But don't count on it.
When the shooting dies down, and some experts say that could take weeks, equally important will be the heavy responsibility victory brings. Winning the peace will require nimble negotiation efforts by U.S. and international diplomats and, quite possibly, an American military presence for years to come.
The surprise takeover of Mosul in 2014 by a few thousand ISIL fighters, who routed demoralized Iraqi soldiers, and its proclamation of a new caliphate were signature achievements for the terrorist organization also known as ISIS. In a rare public appearance that year in Mosul's Great Mosque, ISIL leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi anointed himself ruler of all Muslims.
More than two years later, as elite Iraqi counterterrorism soldiers fight their way deeper into Mosul, supported by tanks, artillery and U.S. special forces advisers and attack aircraft, they can expect brutal opposition from an estimated 3,000 to 4,500 militants. Suicide attackers, roads and buildings seeded with explosives, and innocent civilians used as human shields are in the offing. A million residents could wind up caught between warring factions.
The U.S. military by all accounts has done an exceptional job of rebuilding the Iraqi military depleted under former Iraqi prime minister Nouri al-Maliki. \"The Iraqis are a confident force now. They advance against the enemy. They don't turn and run,\" says James Jeffrey, former U.S. ambassador to Iraq.
Moreover, there are smart post-battle plans to use provincial leaders, police and tribal forces to re-establish order and governance in Mosul in the short term. The longer-term challenge is pacifying the Mosul region beneath a web of intersecting wartime interests by the Iraqi government, Iraqi Kurdistan, Turkey and Iran. This will be heavy lifting for U.S. and international negotiators who have failed to negotiate a cease-fire agreement that sticks in nearby Syria.
Moreover, there's been little progress in persuading Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, a Shiite Muslim, to push for political reforms that would allow Sunni Iraqis to feel secure and involved in their own governance. The absence of those reforms helped set the stage for the ISIL military victories in 2014.
Lastly, the United States learned a hard lesson when U.S. troops left Iraq in 2011. About 5,000 are back to support the push on Mosul. Iraq is certainly more vested in having U.S. forces remain than it was five years ago. The next U.S. president, Donald Trump, will be much better positioned and hopefully more determined to keep a residual military force in Iraq as a hedge against future crises.
Illustration
photo Marko Drobnjakovic, AP
Word count: 536
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
