"New Haven -- When a police officer pulled over Peter Santilli last December in Newtown, Ohio, it seemed like a routine traffic stop. But when the officer ran his data in the law enforcement database, Mr. Santilli's name came up as a match on a terrorist watch list. The cop \"pulled out his weapon immediately,\" Mr. Santilli said, and told him to put his hands up.
The police later admitted that it was a false match. It's likely that the match came from a huge, secretive database called the Known or Suspected Terrorist File. The file is linked to the National Crime Information Center database, which law enforcement officers across the country access over 12 million times a day.
Although less known than watch lists like the no-fly list, the K.S.T. contributes to the secret blacklisting and surveillance of hundreds of thousands of individuals. Without due process protections, the file has the potential to ruin innocent people's lives, while its size dilutes its effectiveness in tracking actual terrorist threats. Moreover, in light of the continuing debate about whether a no-buy list ought to prevent watchlisted people from purchasing guns, it is vital that we re-examine the accuracy and effectiveness of these lists.
In a study of the nation's growing watch lists, we reviewed more than 13,000 pages of records about the K.S.T., which the American Civil Liberties Union and the Civil Liberties and National Security Clinic at Yale Law School obtained through the Freedom of Information Act. The documents cast light on the rapid growth of the file and its predecessor, the Violent Gangs and Terrorist Organizations File. From about 13,000 entries in 2003, it grew over 2,000 percent in five years -- an average of 144 new names being added every day. By 2008, it contained more than 272,000 records. Though the current total is unknown, it's most likely far larger: In 2013 alone, 468,749 names were submitted to the database, and only 1 percent of those were rejected.
Such rapid growth raises questions about whether there are sufficient safeguards to ensure the accuracy of the database. We found little evidence for optimism: The rules for adding names have changed frequently, and a vague \"reasonable suspicion\" standard appeared to be applied without meaningful scrutiny.
The documents also show that the database includes a \"silent hit\" function that in some cases notifies the F.B.I. and other federal agencies when an officer runs a person's name, but doesn't tell the officer about the match. That makes it harder for the person to figure out if she's on the list, despite the fact that silent hits appear to go through less review. It also increases the risk that an officer might unknowingly confront a dangerous individual.
If you are on the K.S.T., trouble at traffic stops may be just the beginning. If you're an immigrant, you may be denied government benefits, and your application for naturalization may be delayed for years. If you're arrested, you may be discriminated against in criminal proceedings, as happened to a defendant in the Bronx whose release on bail was delayed because of a watch-list notation on his rap sheet. The records we reviewed showed instances in which individuals' watch-list status had been mistakenly reported to third parties, like employers and insurance companies.
Despite these consequences, there is no meaningful way for those wrongfully included in the K.S.T. to contest or even confirm their inclusion. This lack of procedural protections poses serious constitutional issues: The Supreme Court has held that individuals cannot be \"stigmatized\" by the government without due process.
Properly constructed and managed, watch lists are important tools in the fight against terrorism. But the bloated size and unaccountability of the K.S.T. undermine its effectiveness. Many of the people on watch lists have an attenuated connection to terrorism at best, and their inclusion diverts attention and resources from people who pose real threats.
Changes are necessary to ensure that the K.S.T. complies with constitutional due process requirements and is effective in supporting counterterrorism efforts. Before a name is added to the list, multiple agencies should review the nomination to ensure that it's based on adequate, up-to-date evidence. Such rigorous quality control should also be retrospective, covering names that were added under previous, less stringent guidelines. Furthermore, individuals who believe that they may be on a watch list by mistake should be able to contest the error directly with the F.B.I. and the Terrorist Screening Center.
Undoubtedly, counterterrorism efforts often require a difficult balancing of security and civil liberty interests. But with respect to the Known or Suspected Terrorist File, it is possible to strengthen both.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
AuthorAffiliation
ALICE A. WANG and ZACHARY BLAU Alice A. Wang and Zachary Blau are recent graduates of Yale Law School, where they were interns in the Civil Liberties and National Security Clinic. This op-ed reflects the views of its authors and does not necessarily represent the views of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Word count: 864
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 16, 2016"
