"Donald Trump Jr. is facing intense backlash on social media after he posted a message on Twitter Monday night that compared Syrian refugees to a bowl of Skittles sprinkled with a few that \"would kill you.\"
\"This image says it all. Let's end the politically correct agenda that doesn't put America first,\" the post said.
Mr. Trump, a top adviser in his father's presidential campaign, appeared to suggest that the nation was faced with a blind selection process in which a few potentially poisoned pieces would be lurking among the thousands of Syrians fleeing a brutal five-year-old civil war.
This image says it all. Let's end the politically correct agenda that doesn't put America first. #trump2016 pic.twitter.com/9fHwog7ssN -- Donald Trump Jr. (@DonaldJTrumpJr) September 19, 2016
The post, shared widely on Twitter, drew swift condemnation and comparisons to white supremacist memes.
Social media users shared images of displaced residents in the region. President Obama's chief speechwriter, Jon Favreau, invoked Omran Daqneesh, the bloodstained, dust-coated boy who was shown sitting in an ambulance after an airstrike and who became a symbol of the suffering in Aleppo, Syria.
Hey @DonaldJTrumpJr, this is one of the millions of children you compared to a poisoned Skittle today: https://t.co/SDSGw0eUIP pic.twitter.com/HuhY9RGvWW -- Jon Favreau (@jonfavs) September 20, 2016
The post also spurred a strong response from Wrigley, the owner of Skittles:
\"Skittles are candy. Refugees are people. We don't feel it's an appropriate analogy. We will respectfully refrain from further commentary as anything we say could be misinterpreted as marketing,\" the company said in a statement that was emailed on Tuesday by a spokeswoman and that initially appeared in The Hollywood Reporter.
The post also drew criticism from a spokeswoman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which is providing aid to Syrians.
\"Syrian refugees are fellow human beings who have left their country to escape war and terrorism,\" Melissa Fleming, the spokeswoman, said in an email on Tuesday. \"Depictions like these are dehumanizing, demeaning and dangerous.\"
Emails sent to the campaign of Donald J. Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, seeking comment were not immediately answered on Tuesday. But Mr. Trump's running mate, Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, criticized the blowback in an interview on MSNBC.
\"It is remarkable to me to see the level of outrage about a metaphor used by Don Jr.,\" he said, adding, \"All the while our F.B.I. and public-safety officials tell us that we can't know for sure who those people are coming into this country.\"
The war in Syria has killed over 400,000 people and has uprooted nearly five million. Last month, the United States said it had met its goal for the year, welcoming its 10,000th Syrian refugee. State Department statistics say that fewer than 20 of the 785,000 refugees settled in the United States since the Sept. 11 attacks have been arrested on terrorism charges.
On the campaign trail, Mr. Trump has likened the influx of Syrian refugees to infiltrators in a Trojan horse and said he would like to \"build a safe zone in Syria, build a big, beautiful safe zone, and you have whatever it is, so they can live.\"
The Skittles meme, using the stark white bowl brimming with multicolored candy, generated accusations of insensitivity.
These aren't Skittles, @DonaldJTrumpJr. pic.twitter.com/h8DXvdFtVM -- Jason Sparks (@sparksjls) September 20, 2016
The younger Mr. Trump was also accused of plagiarism after Joe Walsh, a conservative radio talk show host and a former Illinois congressman known for his Tea Party views, took credit for making the exact analogy last month.
Hey @DonaldJTrumpJr, that's the point I made last month.Glad you agree. pic.twitter.com/Nssw6KC1HY -- Joe Walsh (@WalshFreedom) September 20, 2016
Others noted that the meme dated to at least 2014, when a bowl of M&M's was invoked. And some denounced Mr. Trump for wildly overstating the dangers posed by refugees.
\"the chance of an American being murdered in a terrorist attack caused by a refugee is 1 in 3.64 billion per year\" https://t.co/ZWsr8SsRLK https://t.co/NPsUxPhsFV -- Elise Foley (@elisefoley) September 20, 2016
Others saw a clear link to white supremacist themes and to Trayvon Martin, the black teenager who went out to buy Skittles in 2012 and was shot and killed by George Zimmerman in Florida.
If you think the choice of Skittles is accidental here, you haven't seen the George Zimmerman alt right fan memes. pic.twitter.com/OlZoMgHkze -- Bob Schooley (@Rschooley) September 20, 2016
Some used the meme to extrapolate on other issues, like prisoners and guns.
I'm sure someone's already made this, but: pic.twitter.com/srX6xuidSt -- Alex SK Clatworthy (@LeonFenrir) September 20, 2016
The younger Mr. Trump was criticized this month for evoking Holocaust imagery in criticisms about the news media after he posted an image of Pepe the Frog, a popular alt-right symbol.
In this latest flare-up, some noted that the Skittles message was posted on Twitter from an iPhone, made by Apple, which was co-founded by Steve Jobs, the son of a Syrian immigrant.
Pause to reflect on the fact that this was sent from an iPhone, which was created by the son of a Syrian immigrant. https://t.co/N13gXgRozn -- Binyamin Appelbaum (@BCAppelbaum) September 20, 2016
Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.
Word count: 892
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 21, 2016"
