"As he continues to face a backlash for calling President Obama and Hillary Clinton the \"founders of ISIS,\" Donald J. Trump will travel to the battleground state of Ohio on Monday to discuss his plans to fight terrorism and shore up national security.
The address at Youngstown State University comes as Mr. Trump tries to pivot to serious policy issues from multiple contentious statements.
On Sunday, Trump campaign aides previewed his planned speech in a 40-minute conference call with reporters, saying that it would use the Cold War era as a model for the type of ideological fight the United States is waging against the Islamic State. The New York Times was not invited to join, but it was provided with the number and listened to the call.
Jason Miller, a campaign spokesman, said that Mr. Trump would lay out \"three pillars\" to fighting radical Islamic terrorism. The speech, Stephen Miller, Mr. Trump's policy adviser, said, would call for a stricter immigration questionnaire for people from nations with ties to terrorism; for new alliances with nations willing to help fight terrorism; and for a move from \"nation-building\" to foreign policy \"realism.\" The questionnaire, he added, would require applicants to prove commitment to the ideals of \"tolerance\" and \"pluralism,\" but he did not say precisely how such a thing would be enforced.
Yet it is unclear whether Mr. Trump will be able to use the speech to focus attention on his policies rather than on the criticism he has faced for some of his personal attacks on opponents. Last week, Mr. Trump delivered a speech aimed at casting himself as a president who could bring new jobs and prosperity to the country. But a day later, he appeared to raise the possibility that gun rights supporters could take matters into their own hands if Mrs. Clinton were elected president and appointed judges who favor stricter gun control measures.
The next day, he was again on the defensive for saying that Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton had created the Islamic State and that the terrorist group \"honors\" the president.
On Friday morning, Mr. Trump, who had previously hinted that he was being serious in his phrasing, later defended it as \"sarcasm.\" At a rally in the evening, he added that his statements were \"not that sarcastic, to be honest with you.\"
Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.
Word count: 426
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 16, 2016"
