"WASHINGTON -- Senator Angus King, independent of Maine, was crowing a bit on the chamber floor Thursday when he began reading a staff member's email about a planning and development meeting the previous night in the town of Sanford, Me.
\"Every single person I spoke with either wanted me to convey their thanks to Senator King for his stand on 'doing something on gun control' to asking me that he stand firm and do more. People who own guns (and said so) and those who don't. Every single person expressed dismay that Congress has not acted on this.\"
Within hours, however, the Senate had again voted not to act -- effectively condemning to legislative purgatory a measure that Mr. King had praised as providing just the sort of common-sense legislation his constituents were demanding after mass shootings like the one this month in Orlando, Fla.
The bipartisan proposal written by Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, was aimed at stopping terrorist suspects on the government's no-fly list from buying guns. It survived a motion to table that would have killed the measure outright, but fell short of the 60 votes needed to advance it. The vote was 52 to 46.
In the end, Ms. Collins was able to persuade just seven of her fellow Republicans to join 45 Democrats and Mr. King, who caucuses with Democrats, in favor. Ms. Collins later expressed confidence that the two Democratic senators who were absent, Dianne Feinstein of California and Bernie Sanders of Vermont, also would have voted in favor, leaving her short six votes.
Still, the path forward is murky at best.
\"We'll keep working on it, and it's really up to the leaders where we go from here,\" Ms. Collins said, adding, \"I never give up.\"
In the short term, there is almost no chance the measure will resurface. Even the underlying bill that it would be attached to as an amendment, the annual Commerce, Justice, Science appropriations bill, is about to be set aside so that the Senate can return to a more urgent fight over financing to combat the mosquito-borne Zika virus.
Republican senators who voted against the Collins proposal cited concern about due process, saying they objected to the government being able to block the sale of a weapon without first demonstrating probable cause to a judge that the person trying to buy the gun was a terrorist.
Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Republican, put forward a proposal that would block a gun sale to a suspected terrorist for three days to give federal prosecutors time to make the case. Democrats have said that standard is so high that it is unworkable.
In an interview, Ms. Collins noted that if federal prosecutors could demonstrate such probable cause, the prospective gun buyer should probably be under arrest.
Mr. Cornyn's proposal, which also failed to advance, received 53 votes on Monday, but was supported by just two Democrats, Senators Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Joe Donnelly of Indiana. A similar but more broadly worded proposal by Mr. Cornyn received 55 votes in December, but at that point also had just the same two Democrats in favor.
With the frustration over the failure to tighten the nation's gun control laws boiling over, House Democrats staged a sit-in for more than 25 hours to demand votes on two measures -- both of which had failed in the Senate on Monday.
Speaker Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, who seized command over the House, pushed through a bill and adjourned for the Fourth of July recess, derided the Democrats' effort as a \"publicity stunt\" that risked undermining the House as an institution.
Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who supported the Collins measure, said on Thursday that it might take another terrorist attack to jolt his Republican colleagues into action.
And yet in a sign that Ms. Collins may yet have found a narrow path forward, Representative Carlos Curbelo, a freshman Republican from Miami, said Friday morning that he was introducing a companion version of the Collins measure in the House.
\"I was very pleased when Congressman Curbelo called me yesterday and said there was considerable interest in our bipartisan bill,\" Ms. Collins said. \"To have a companion bill in the House is also a very good sign of progress and the fact that people are eager to come up with a bipartisan approach to a real problem that does not compromise Second Amendment rights. And I believe that is exactly what we have done.\"
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.
Photograph
Senator Angus King, Independent of Maine, Said at a News Conference On Tuesday That His Constituents Were Unhappy That Congress Had Not Enacted a Gun Control Bill. (Photograph by Stephen Crowley/the New York Times)
Word count: 833
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 25, 2016"
