"CORRECTION APPENDED. JAKARTA, Indonesia -- Indonesia's national police confirmed through DNA testing that the country's most wanted terrorism suspect had been killed during a gun battle earlier in the week on Sulawesi Island, the police announced Saturday.
The police said their laboratory had confirmed the identity of Abu Wardah, better known as Santoso. He was the leader of the Mujahedeen of Eastern Indonesia, a terrorist cell that has professed allegiance to the Islamic State.
Santoso and one of his followers were killed on Monday during a gunfight with Indonesian security forces near the Central Sulawesi Province town of Poso, which has long been a hotbed for terrorist activity. Around 20 members of his terrorist cell remained at large.
\"From the DNA test results, it's positive and confirmed that one of the corpses is Santoso,\" said Brig. Gen. Boy Rafli Amar, a national police spokesman.
Santoso, 39, and his cell grew to national prominence in the past several years by carrying out attacks on security forces, in particular the police, as well as training militants across the country. Santoso's group has included Uighurs from the western Chinese region of Xinjiang.
Last year, President Joko Widodo of Indonesia made it a priority to increase efforts to capture or kill Santoso, establishing a joint military-police task force that included fighter jets to support the mission.
In March, the United States placed Santoso and the Mujahedeen of Eastern Indonesia on its global terrorist designation list.
\"Indonesia has pre-empted the creation of a wilayah in Southeast Asia,\" said Rohan Gunaratna, a terrorism expert at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore, referring to an autonomous Islamic governorate.
Indonesia has suffered multiple terrorist attacks carried out by Islamic militants since 2000, including bombings of Christian churches, nightclub bombings on the island of Bali, and attacks on upscale Western hotels and the Australian Embassy in the capital, Jakarta.
Correction: August 23, 2016, Tuesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on July 24 about confirmation by the Indonesian authorities that Abu Wardah, better known as Santoso -- the country's most wanted terrorism suspect and leader of the Mujahedeen of Eastern Indonesia -- had been killed in a gun battle earlier in the week misstated his age and misidentified the Chinese region that the Uighurs in his terrorist group came from. He was 39, not 40, and the region is Xinjiang, not Ningxia.
Word count: 413
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 24, 2016"
