"When the barricades were removed, the law enforcement officers had cleared out and the news cameras had mostly dispersed, life on West 27th Street in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan appeared to return to normal. But on Monday morning, nearly 36 hours after an explosive device was discovered across the street from her home, Lisa Bergofin was still shaking, thinking about what could have been.
\"It's still so fresh,\" she said, crying as she stood in her dimly lit kitchen, with rain pouring outside. \"I'm not sure I've processed it yet.\"
Walking her dog on Sunday, Ms. Bergofin, 48, averted going in the direction of the portion of sidewalk where the device was found, not wanting to relive that night. She exchanged tearful hugs with neighbors passing by, even those she barely knew.
Their faces revealed what Ms. Bergofin has felt ever since the bomb squad left her street: a numb, overwhelming sense of relief that somehow, their street had been spared.
The explosive device found on the north side of 27th Street -- a pressure cooker with a cellphone attached -- was similar to the one on 23rd Street that blasted a Dumpster more than 100 feet, shattered windows and injured 29 people.
\"I can't help but think of Boston,\" said Manoli Wetherell, who lives in a co-op two doors down from where the device was found. The police said the devices found on Saturday were similar to those used in the 2013 Boston Marathon bombings that killed three people and wounded 264 others.
\"It was a close call,\" Ms. Wetherell said, looking at the orange cones that marked the site of the device on Sunday evening. \"The value of life got a bit deeper.\"
In the aftermath of Saturday's course of events, neighbors on 27th Street frantically texted in group messages, comforting one another and exchanging updates. Many felt indebted to one neighbor in particular -- Jane Schreibman, a 66-year-old photographer who lives on the second floor of the building two doors down from the site of the device.
Around 10 p.m., Ms. Schreibman stepped outside her house and something about 15 yards away caught her eye. It was a destroyed pressure cooker with wires coming out of it.
\"I thought it was a kid's science project,\" she said. But having heard about the explosion earlier that night on 23rd Street, \"there was a nagging suspicion in the back of my mind.\"
She decided to call the authorities, who immediately sent New York state troopers to investigate and eventually remove the device. \"It was just a matter of timing,\" Ms. Schreibman said.
The uncertainty that followed on Saturday night has persisted days later, as many questions about the motives and location have remained unanswered. The block of 27th Street between Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue is a fairly quiet mix of residential apartments, commercial properties, wholesalers and a few other businesses -- not what most people would consider a target for terrorism, neighbors said.
\"The randomness of this was hard,\" said Dan Siegler, 54, who lives across the street from where the pressure cooker was found. \"I'd like to know what should have happened and what didn't.\"
His 15-year-old daughter, Gemma, was still so shaken by the night that she asked her parents to let her stay home from school for the day, not wanting to be apart from them.
\"It's hard to explain to a 15-year-old why there was a bomb across the street from her,\" he said. \"I'm still wrestling with that.\"
Three floors below, Ms. Bergofin's 14-year-old daughter, Annika, stayed in her pajamas all day Sunday, trying not to think about the previous night, when she spent four hours huddled on a couch with her parents and a friend, staying as far away from the windows as possible. Her father kept offering to play the movie \"Shrek,\" in hopes of calming her down, but she kept insisting they watch the news instead. They could do nothing but wait, in fear and agony, for the bomb squad to remove the device.
\"It feels unreal,\" Annika said. \"Eventually I'll look back on it and it won't be as scary. But I definitely think it's something that will stay with me.\"
Credit: SAMANTHA SCHMIDT; Kitty Bennett contributed research.
Photograph
An Explosive Device Was Found Across the Street From the Home of Lisa Bergofin and Her Daughter, Annika, 14, On West 27th Street in Chelsea. \"I'm Not Sure I've Processed It yet,\" Ms. Bergofin Said. (Photograph by Hilary Swift for the New York Times); the Explosive Device Found On the North Side of 27th Street Was Successfully Removed by a Robot. There Was a Pressure Cooker with a Cellphone Attached to It, Law Enforcement Officials Said. (Photographs by Lucien Harriot)
Word count: 813
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 20, 2016"
