"JAKARTA, Indonesia -- The center of the Indonesian capital was rocked by a series of explosions and gunfire on Thursday. The police seemed to have been the chief targets.
At least four people were killed, one police officer and three civilians, according to the Indonesian National Police spokesman, Gen. Anton Charliyan. A traffic police post was heavily damaged by bomb blasts, according to witnesses speaking to local television station, TV One.
Video showed a series of explosions, possibly car bombs detonating, in a parking lot across the street from the police post at 10:40 a.m., just yards from a Starbucks and a Burger King.
Then a gunman opened fire at the police post.
General Anton categorized the episode as a terrorist attack.
Numerous police vehicles and ambulances rushed to the scene, on Jalan Thamrin, one of Jakarta's main thoroughfares, near the Sarinah shopping mall. Yet even as the security forces converged there, more explosions were reported elsewhere in the city.
Jeremy Douglas, the head of Southeast Asian operations for the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, said he heard six blasts.
The United Nations office is at the intersection in Jakarta where the explosions occurred.
\"And now a serious exchange of fire in the street,\" Mr. Douglas said in a Twitter message.
The Indonesian police have yet to say if the attacks were terrorist-related, although splinter cells of Jemaah Islamiyah, the now crushed Southeast Asian terrorist group that was linked to Al Qaeda, have targeted the police in recent years.
It was the first mass attack in Jakarta since the twin bombings of two hotels in 2009. Jemaah Islamiyah executed twin nightclub bombings on Bali in 2002 that killed more than 200 people, most of them foreigners.
Al Qaeda's leader, Ayman al-Zawahri, said in a speech released on the Internet this week that Southeast Asia was ripe for a jihadist revival, according to The Long War Journal, an online publication that tracks terrorist activity. The recording focused on Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines, according to the website.
Last year, it was reported that at least 50 Indonesians had joined the thousands of foreign fighters who had traveled to Syria to help extremist groups trying to create an Islamic state there.
The involvement of Indonesian fighters in Syria became more prominent after an extremist from Borneo named Riza Fardi was killed there last year, according to the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict in Jakarta.
Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here .
Credit: JOE COCHRANE; Thomas Fuller contributed reporting from Bangkok
Photograph
Indonesian Police Officers Took Position Behind a Vehicle After a Series of Blasts Struck Jakarta, the Capital, On Thursday. (Photograph by Bay Ismoyo/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 490
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 14, 2016"
