"Turkey, with its deep cultural roots dating back to the Byzantine Empire, has long been a magnet for travelers, but Tuesday's suicide bombing in Istanbul could be a blow to its tourism.
The blast killed 10 people, most of them German visitors, and wounded 15 others. The bomber, who officials said recently arrived from Syria, targeted the historic district of Sultanahmet that attracts tens of thousands of tourists every day to see the famed Blue Mosque, Topkapi Palace and Hagia Sophia.
No group immediately claimed responsibility, but Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu blamed the Islamic State.
\"Turkey is the top target of all terrorist groups,\" President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said in a televised address after the bombing. He said Turkey was \"fighting against all of them (terrorist groups) equally.\"
Germany and Denmark issued travel warnings Tuesday for their citizens in Turkey, urging them to avoid large public gatherings as well as tourist attractions in Istanbul and other big cities. Germany's foreign ministry said more attacks were expected.
The U.S. State Department issued a similar advisory in September that Americans in Turkey \"should be alert to the potential for violence.\"
Earl Starkey of New York-based Protravel International, which helps plan trips to Istanbul, said the attack could have a short-run effect on tourism there.
\"We live in a world where anything can happen anywhere,\" he said. \"People have short memories, but this is the first time tourists have been targeted in Turkey, so we will have to see how they will react. It is too new to have had cancellations.\"
Karen Sefer, president of Sea Song Tours, which is based in Turkey and organizes tours in Istanbul, said the location of the attack in an area frequented by tourists was shocking.
\"There will be many clients who will continue their travels as planned and others that may postpone their travels,\" she said.
Simon Calder, travel editor for Britain's Independent newspaper, wrote that Istanbul's tourist industry would suffer not just with visitors from Europe and other Western countries but also with tourists from the Arab world.
\"The attack will undoubtedly have an impact on holidaymakers' summer plans,\" Calder wrote. \"Cruise lines may also adjust their schedules to cut down on time in the city.\"
Ships from popular American cruise lines generally don't go to Istanbul this time of year. It's a popular summer stop, but companies reposition ships to warm-weather spots in the winter.
Turkey drew 40million visitors in 2014, up 5% from 2013, Turkey's Ministry of Culture and Tourism said. Istanbul itself attracted almost 13million tourists last year, according to the Global Destinations Cities Index, a benchmark compiled by MasterCard.
The index ranks Istanbul in fifth place as a tourist attraction, just ahead of New York and behind Dubai, Paris, Bangkok and London. The MasterCard study had projected that Istanbul could overtake Paris in four years to become Europe's second-most visited city.
That growth rate comes amid myriad security threats that Turkey faces.
The Islamic State was behind at least three attacks in the nation in 2015, including an October suicide bombing at a peace rally in the capital Ankara that killed more than 100 people.
Turkish security forces are also locked in a decades-old conflict with Kurdish militant groups battling for greater autonomy for the minority Kurds.
The country is also under pressure as it hosts more than 2 million refugees from neighboring Syria and serves as the main gateway for Syrians and other migrants trying to reach Europe.
Contributing: Nancy Trejos in New York; Gene Sloan in Moorestown, N.J.
Credit: Kim Hjelmgaard, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo BULENT KILIC AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 640
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
