"Stanley Almodovar arrived from Puerto Rico with a grim task: bury his 23-year-old son after the worst mass shooting in U.S. history.
The 23-year-old had texted family members hours before the gunfire erupted in Pulse, a gay nightclub, asking for his father's new phone number.
\"He was a very happy-going kid. He was happy with who he was,\" Almodovar said of his son Stanley Almodovar III, a pharmacy technician who lived in the Orlando area.
\"He was planning to fly to Puerto Rico to surprise me for Father's Day,\" his dad said Tuesday. \"That was his message to me, his way of saying, 'I love you.'\"
Almodovar said his son probably will be buried in the Orlando area where his mother lives.
The younger Almodovar was among a number of Hispanics at Pulse early Sunday celebrating Latin night when the shooter arrived. The Puerto Rican community in particular suffered a devastating blow in the loss of so many young people so suddenly.
Census statistics suggest Central Florida, from Orlando to Palm Bay, has become a haven for those who trace their roots to the U.S. territory: The area is home to about 1 million.
Cities have Puerto Rican parades and Puerto Rican Chambers of Commerce.
As soon as victims' names were released, the community came together to mourn.
\"It's devastating,\" said Angel Baez-Camacho, whose son went Friday to Pulse but didn't return the night of the massacre. \"Most Puerto Ricans came here because it was so ostracizing back home,\" a big reason Puerto Rican gays moved to Orlando.
Blocks from the nightclub, still roped off Tuesday as investigators pieced together what happened, a memorial of flowers and burned out candles sat near a row of red, white and blue Puerto Rican flags.
\"The Pulse was like a home. The Puerto Rican community here is always the biggest crowd in the (gay) pride community. You'll find that all of us honor our island, but we are Americans by birth,\" Baez-Camacho said, adding that the deadly attack appears to be unifying factions within gay and Puerto Rican communities.
Baez-Camacho visited a makeshift memorial at Dr. Phillips Center for the Performing Arts, knelt in prayer, genuflected, then left behind an American flag.
Jose Martinez walked up to the colorful tribute spread along the grass near the entrance of the center in downtown Orlando. There he sat quietly next to a poster of one of Sunday's club massacre victims.
\"This is my best friend,\" Martinez said.
Sam Lopez, president of United Third Bridge, a Puerto Rican-based advocacy organization in Palm Bay, Fla., said he has heard from a number of people from Orlando to San Juan.
\"This has been stressful. It's very sad. Our community is hurting,\" he said. \"People are calling and asking what can we do. They want to know about what can be done about assault rifles. They're asking, 'Can we do more?'\"
Lopez, chairman of the board for the Florida Puerto Rican Hispanic Chamber of Commerce in Melbourne, Fla., praised President Obama's decision to come Thursday to Orlando to pay tribute to the shooting victims.
\"I think what the president is doing is a good thing. We have to avoid division, being polarized,\" he said. \"This is not just about Puerto Rico but all Americans.\"
For Stanley Almodovar, his son's death brought the nearly two-decade war on terror close to home. \"My son was the life of the family, always singing, making jokes,\" he said.
The father said he moved back to Puerto Rico last year and left his son behind to live in Orlando. He said the 23-year-old was in good hands with his mother and had plenty of connections to the community at large.
\"Our roots are deep here in Central Florida,\" he said.
\"I had another son who went to Iraq,\" Almodovar said. \"But I never thought I never thought this kind of thing would happen in my own land.\"
Illustration
photo J.D. Gallop, Florida Today
Word count: 701
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
