"JERUSALEM -- A Palestinian teenager scrambled over a fence surrounding a Jewish settlement in the West Bank, ran into a house and stabbed an Israeli-American girl to death as she slept in her bed on Thursday morning.
The perpetrator, Mohammad Tarayreh, 19, was fatally shot after the attack. The victim, Hallel Yaffa Ariel, 13, had been sleeping in after staying up late for a dance performance the night before. Her father found her in her room, according to the Israeli news media and the head of the settlement's volunteer security team.
The killing, in the Kiryat Arba settlement, was the latest in a series of attacks that surged in October and have left more than 30 Israelis dead. Several of the victims, including Hallel, have been dual citizens of the United States, according to the State Department. More than 210 Palestinians have also been killed, most while carrying out attacks or when thought to be about to do so.
Thursday's attack was particularly gruesome.
Mr. Tarayreh, from Bani Naim, a sprawling town separated from Kiryat Arba by hills, a highway and a barrier surrounding the Jewish settlement, managed to cross over the fence early Thursday, Eyal Gelman, the head of the Kiryat Arba security team, told Israeli radio. He entered the Ariels' house and locked himself in. The team of armed residents, including Hallel's father, saw that the fence had been breached and began searching for the assailant.
\"Everything happened very quickly,\" Mr. Gelman said. Three of the volunteers managed to get into the locked house. Mr. Tarayreh attacked one of them with his knife, Mr. Gelman said. Another volunteer shot and killed Mr. Tarayreh.
The volunteers rushed to the bedroom the girl appeared to have shared with two younger sisters, who had already left for the day. \"I counted 18 stab wounds,\" Mr. Gelman said.
Hallel died after she was rushed to a hospital in Jerusalem.
\"My daughter was sleeping, calm, she was happy,\" said her mother, Rina Ariel, who wept as she spoke to Israeli reporters. \"A terrorist comes and murders her in her bed.\"
Mr. Tarayreh may have been trying to emulate a young woman from his hometown, or perhaps to avenge her death. The woman, Majd al-Khudour, 18, rammed her car into a bus stop at the entrance of Kiryat Arba on Friday and was killed.
A Facebook group for news from Bani Naim posted screenshots that it claimed were from Mr. Tarayreh's own Facebook page, in which he appeared to have posted a poem praising Ms. Khudour's bravery.
Israeli forces shuttered entrances to Bani Naim on Thursday and raided the Tarayreh home. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced after a security meeting that the house would be destroyed and permits allowing the family to work in Israel withdrawn, and that the town would be cordoned off until further notice.
\"The horrifying murder of a young girl in her bed underscores the bloodlust and inhumanity of the incitement-driven terrorists that we are facing,\" Mr. Netanyahu said in a statement.
Spokesmen for Palestinian officials did not immediately respond to requests for comment. There were no claims of responsibility for the attack by Palestinian armed groups.
Hallel, the victim, was related to Uri Ariel, Israel's right-wing housing minister, who is a cousin of Hallel's father, Israeli news media reported.
Mr. Ariel immediately pointed to her death as a call for more settlements in the West Bank, where Israel has maintained a nearly five-decade military occupation.
\"It has to be clear that in the absence of a partner, that there will be Israeli sovereignty from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea,\" he said after the killing. \"We have to employ very tough deterrence measures, such as expulsion of families, ending monetary aid, seizing money.\"
Sari Bashi, the country director for Human Rights Watch in Israel and the Palestinian territories, described the killing as \"horrific.\"
\"There can be no justification, moral or legal, for killing an Israeli child as she sleeps in her bed,\" Ms. Bashi said. \"As despicable as the killing is, the Israeli government has no authority to punish the attacker's family members, who committed no crime.\"
Also on Thursday, a Palestinian stabbed two people near a market in the northern Israeli city of Netanya, Micky Rosenfeld, an Israeli police spokesman, said on Twitter.
The victims, a man and a woman, were injured. An armed civilian shot and killed the attacker, whom Mr. Rosenfeld identified as a Palestinian man from the northern West Bank town of Tulkarm.
AuthorAffiliation
DIAA HADID and MYRA NOVECK Follow Diaa Hadid on Twitter @diaahadid .
Photograph
The Parents and a Sister, Left, of Hallel Yaffa Ariel, a 13-Year-Old Killed in Bed at Her Home, Mourning at Her Funeral On Thursday. (Photograph by Jim Hollander/European Pressphoto Agency)
Word count: 823
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 1, 2016"
