"When German writer Jrgen Todenhfer tried to find someone to join him on a visit inside the Islamic State, he got two responses: \"Are you crazy?\" and, \"I would have gone, but my wife said 'No.'\"
The former judge, 75, took his son Frederic, 32, instead for the 10-day trip. The father and son claim to be the only known Westerners to negotiate a visit with the militant group whose brutality has made it one of the most feared in the Middle East.
Todenhfer wanted to see for himself how the Islamic State operates a governing system that crucifies enemies, beheads hostages and subjects women and children to abuse and slavery.
My Journey Into the Heart of Terror, Todenhfer's book about the journey, was published in English in May. The pair will release a documentary about the trip for German television this month. An advance screening will take place in Berlin on Wednesday.
\"We never ultimately really found out why they let us go there,\" said Todenhfer, who spent months over Skype negotiating safe passage for the endeavor. He spoke to USA TODAY in his office in Bavaria in May, after completing the quest to an organization notorious for its abductions and mass killings 18 months earlier.
They visited Raqqa, the group's de facto capital in Syria, and Mosul, Iraq's second largest city.
\"They wanted to prove to us that they are running a functioning state, not just a terrorist organization,\" Todenhfer said. \"They tell (potential recruits): 'Come and join us. You will live in a wonderful villa. You will have a lot money and wonderful girls.' They don't live in wonderful villas. They don't have a lot of money. Many can't afford wives or slaves.'\"
He said that they were shown what appeared to be illustrations of a working administration including a court system, police station and hospital.
This is not the first time that Todenhfer has intervened or documented what is taking place in conflict zones.
He was a German parliamentarian for nearly two decades. During that time he helped secure the release of political prisoners in Chile under the country's then dictator Augusto Pinochet and spent time with mujahideen fighters battling Soviet occupied Afghanistan. He met with President Bashar Assad more than once to encourage diplomatic talks with the Syrian leader.
Frederic Todenhfer, who has accompanied his father on many journeys to the Arab world, said he tried to stop the trip. \"I met with former Iraqi diplomats, with all kinds of people, just to persuade him not to go. Then, once I realized I couldn't stop him, I decided I had to join him,\" he said.
Both men said they encountered numerous examples of ordinary life within the group's walls that did not match what they had seen in Western media reports.
\"People were walking around in jeans, even in (fashionable) skinny jeans. They had soccer jerseys on,\" Frederic Todenhfer said.
But there were also stark reminders of how far they had come.
After hearing a local judge had not scheduled any executions or amputations that day, the Todenhfers' guide, a man named Abu Qatada who works in the Islamic State's media department, said: \"Wait, if the judge can't show you that, I can. I can execute anybody for you. I can even cut some hands, if you want. What do you want? A Shia (Muslim) or a Kurd?\"
Credit: Kim Hjelmgaard, @khjelmgaard, USA TODAY
Word count: 594
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
