"A man who prosecutors say received military training in Yemen from Anwar al-Awlaki, the American-born radical Muslim cleric who was later killed by the United States in a drone strike, pleaded guilty on Friday in Manhattan to three terrorism-related counts.
In 2010, prosecutors have said, the defendant, Minh Quang Pham, traveled secretly to Yemen, swore allegiance to Al Qaeda's affiliate there and also helped the group prepare its online propaganda publication, Inspire.
Mr. Pham was extradited to the United States from Britain about a year ago and was scheduled for trial on Feb. 1 in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
But on Friday, he pleaded guilty to providing material support to the terrorist group -- Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, or A.Q.A.P. -- which carries a maximum prison term of 15 years; conspiring to receive military-type training from the group, for which he could face five years; and using a firearm in furtherance of crimes of violence, which carries a maximum life prison term and a mandatory minimum of 30 years.
\"Pham provided material support to the highest levels of A.Q.A.P.,\" Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, said on Friday.
Mr. Pham, who is in his early 30s, was born in Vietnam, lived in Britain since childhood, converted to Islam and is a practicing Muslim, his lawyer, Bobbi C. Sternheim, has said in court papers.
Addressing the judge, Alison J. Nathan, in a soft English-accented voice, Mr. Pham admitted his guilt, saying that at the time he agreed with others to receive training from the group, \"I knew that A.Q.A.P. was an organization engaged in terrorist activity.\"
\"I entered into this agreement knowingly and willfully,\" he said.
A prosecutor, Sean S. Buckley, told Judge Nathan that had the case gone to trial, the government would have presented proof that included Mr. Pham's own statements to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, after he was administered his rights, in which he admitted that Mr. Awlaki taught him how to build an explosive device using household materials.
\"And al-Awlaki directed Pham to return to the United Kingdom, where he was to construct and detonate the device\" at Heathrow Airport, in London, specifically \"targeting arrivals from the United States and Israel,\" Mr. Buckley said.
In court on Friday, Ms. Sternheim said there was \"no proof\" that Mr. Pham, after he returned to Britain in July 2011, took any steps to cause harm at Heathrow.
If true, the allegation that Mr. Awlaki provided explosives training to Mr. Pham would add a new operational element to the government's case against the cleric, who in September 2011 became the first American deliberately killed in a drone strike.
Prosecutors noted in court papers that A.Q.A.P. distributed a 2010 interview with Mr. Awlaki in which he urged his followers to kill American citizens and said that the man who tried to bring down an airplane on Christmas 2009, the so-called underwear bomber, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, had been one of his students.
Mr. Pham is to be sentenced on April 14.
The case garnered attention recently after Ms. Sternheim argued in a filing that it would be hard to find unbiased jurors for the trial because of inflammatory statements by Donald J. Trump in his Republican presidential campaign, as well as the terrorist attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, Calif.
\"The defense believes that it will be difficult, if not impossible, to seat a truly impartial New York City jury in the current climate of Islamophobia and hatred of Muslims,\" Ms. Sternheim wrote.
Ms. Sternheim asked that each side's lawyers be allowed 30 minutes of additional questioning, with the goal of \"rooting out prejudice and bias\" among prospective jurors. Typically, federal judges in Manhattan do the questioning themselves.
Mr. Bharara's office opposed the motion, which the judge had not yet ruled upon.
Follow The New York Times's Metro coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the New York Today newsletter.
Photograph
Minh Quang Pham
Word count: 684
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 9, 2016"
