"ORLANDO, Fla. -- Just hours after the music at the Pulse nightclub was interrupted by the roar of gunfire, a teenager with a nose stud and tight jeans peered across his dinner table here. \"Dad,\" Carvin Casillas said, \"I'm kind of gay.\"
The worst mass shooting in United States history by a single perpetrator, which left 49 people dead and 53 injured, has sent the nation reeling and ignited heated conversations about firearm access, terrorism and homophobia. It has also had the incidental effect of pushing some gay people in this increasingly Latino community out of the closet.
Some had their sexuality revealed by accident: Gertrude Merced learned that her 25-year-old son, Enrique, was gay only after she heard the news of his death. Others, though, have chosen to expose their inner lives, stirred by the outpouring of support for Orlando's gay community or wrought with sorrow and unable to keep their secrets in anymore.
\"I just had to let them know,\" said Mr. Casillas, 19, a soon-to-be college freshman who had been dancing at Pulse for more than year, unbeknown to his Puerto Rican father and Cuban mother. His mother had raised him in a church where parishioners learned that gay people went to hell.
\"This is getting to be a bigger part of me every day that passes on,\" he said of his sexuality. \"I didn't know if I was going to be able to keep that from my family.\"
Most of the people packed into the club in the early morning on June 12 were too young to remember the early days of the AIDS crisis, when disease and tragedy exposed gay men like never before, prompting some of them on their death beds to reveal their sexuality to family and friends. But some older members of Orlando's gay community see this post-Pulse catharsis as an echo of that time, with a notable exception.
\"This time around, we're so much further along in our own self-acceptance,\" said Tom Dyer, 60, who has been chronicling Central Florida's gay community since he founded Watermark, a local magazine for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, in 1994. Broader cultural attitudes, he added, have changed, too.
The father of Mr. Casillas, who owns an auto mechanic shop, seemed to accept him the day of the massacre, Mr. Casillas said, reaching across the table and kissing him on the head. \"O.K., Papa,\" Joe Casillas told his son, using a term of endearment.
But not all families have easily embraced their children's sexuality.
Pedro Julio Serrano, 41, a gay activist in Puerto Rico, has attended eight funerals for Pulse victims. At one, the mother of Gilberto Ramon Silva Menendez, who was among the 49 killed, circled the gathering with a rainbow flag, announcing her pride in her son's identity.
At two other occasions, though, he said he could see that some relatives were ashamed: \"That they would have preferred to deal with this privately and that nobody had to know that their son or daughter was gay. I can see it and I can feel it. And I just want to hug them and hold them and tell them that there is nothing wrong with this.\"
On Tuesday, Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch visited some of the people injured in the attack and the relatives of some who were slain. She spoke of those who might choose to hide their sexuality out of fear of such violence in the future.
\"Let me say to our L.G.B.T. friends and family, particularly to anyone who might view this tragedy as an indication that their identities -- their essential selves -- might somehow be better left unexpressed or in the shadows: This Department of Justice -- and your country -- stands with you in the light,\" she said.
Cory Richards, 24, spent the early hours of June 12 dancing under the strobe lights at Pulse with his boyfriend, Enrique L. Rios Jr. Neither man had told their parents they were gay. But around 9 a.m., as Mr. Richards emerged from the carnage, he cried into his phone to his father.
\"I can't find my baby,\" Mr. Richards recalled saying. \"I can't find my baby.\"
\"What?\" his father responded.
\"That's my boyfriend, that's not my friend,\" Mr. Richards said he told him of Mr. Rios. \"That's my boyfriend.\"
\"I don't care what you are,\" he recalled his father saying. \"You're my son. I didn't know, but I accept it.\"
Mr. Rios had died. A thousand miles away, his mother, Ms. Merced, 48, learned of her son's death. And then received a call from his boyfriend.
During an interview at her home in Queens, Ms. Merced said she had thought her son was straight. She raised him Baptist, she said, and the two were close. \"This is a sinful nature,\" she said of homosexuality, still wearing her ruffled church clothes and high heels after church on Sunday. \"But I still would have loved my son.\"
In Orlando, Leyda and Mane Hernandez have struggled to come to terms with her son's identity since he came out about 10 years ago. \"I grew up in Puerto Rico, in the city of Ponce,\" said Mane Hernandez, 52, \"making fun of gay, gay, gay.\"
Their son, Enakai Hernandez, is a 27-year-old artist who had partied at Pulse for years. On the weekend of the attack, he was staying at his parent's home in a gated community here, sick in bed.
When he woke and the depth of the tragedy revealed itself, his mother took him in her arms as he cried.
\"Sabes que te quiero mucho?\" she has told him over and over in recent days. \"Que tú eres el amor de mi vida?\" Her message: that she loved her son and considered him the love of her life.
\"Although I am not proud of what my son is, because it's not what I wanted for him, I accept it,\" she said. \"I accepted it before, I still accept it, and now I accept it even more. Because I know there are many people that hate. These are human beings who are equal to everyone else. They are people, they have feelings, they have hearts, they have families.\"
Orlando's Puerto Rican population has boomed in recent years, and the city's gay population -- once largely white -- has changed as a result. The vast majority of the Pulse victims who died were Hispanic. And 23 were from Puerto Rico -- just like Ms. Merced.
When Mr. Richards, the unknown boyfriend, called her last week to introduce himself, Ms. Merced invited him to her son's funeral. He accepted. \"I will see him,\" she said. \"Eventually, I may want to ask him some questions.\"
Credit: JULIE TURKEWITZ; John Eligon and Frances Robles contributed reporting from Orlando, and Samantha Schmidt from New York.
Photograph
Carvin Casillas, Who Regularly Danced at Pulse, Came Out to His Parents After the Shooting in Florida. He Was Raised in a Church That Taught Gay People Went to Hell. (Photograph by Hilary Swift for the New York Times) (A13)
Word count: 1199
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 22, 2016"
