"After a rash of politically motivated seizures in the 1960s and 1970s, airline hijacking today is much rarer after security enhancements in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
The use of passenger jets as bombs at the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon spurred measures to harden and lock cockpit doors to protect pilots from terrorists.
The 9/11 hijackers who took control of the planes were armed with box cutters, allowed in carry-on bags at the time. Today, such items are no longer permissible in the cabin. Passengers and luggage are now scrutinized more thoroughly for guns and bombs.
The crash of United Airlines Flight 93 in Pennsylvania that day demonstrated that passengers would resist hijackers once they realized the terrorists intended to send the jets into buildings. Previously, most hijackers demanded trips to destinations such as Cuba or the Middle East.
The Aviation Safety Network, part of the Flight Safety Foundation that tracks aviation issues, tallied 1,066 hijackings since 1931. Some involved diversions for violent passengers rather than using the planes as weapons.
The latest hijacking involved an Egyptian man who claimed to have a bomb and ordered an EgyptAir flight from Alexandria to Cairo to land in Cyprus on Tuesday. He surrendered after freeing passengers and crew.
The number of hijackings has dwindled recently. About 50 have been reported since Sept. 11, 2001, none in the U.S., according to the Aviation Safety Network.
Perhaps the longest-lasting hijacking occurred in 1968. An El Al flight from Rome to Tel Aviv was commandeered on July 23 by members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and ordered to Algeria. The final 12 hostages were freed Aug. 31.
And in November 1971, a man using the name D.B. Cooper hijacked a Northwest Orient flight from Portland to Seattle.
In exchange for $200,000 and four parachutes, he released passengers in Seattle. Then, flying toward Reno, he jumped out and disappeared forever.
Credit: Bart Jansen, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo KATIA CHRISTODOULOU, european pressphoto agency
Word count: 368
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
