"BARCELONA, SPAIN -- It is not working. President Obama's slow-but-steady strategy to defeat the Islamic State is clawing back a little territory in Syria and Iraq but is doing nothing to dent the charismatic appeal of the militant group, disrupt its propaganda or prevent it from killing Europeans.
The Brussels attacks that left at least 30 people dead at the city's international airport and a subway station adjacent to the European Union headquarters -- the symbolism could scarcely be more potent -- came just four days after the capture in the Belgian capital on Friday of Salah Abdeslam. He was the sole survivor among the 10 men believed to have perpetrated the attacks that killed 130 people in Paris a little more than four months ago.
The Islamic State claimed responsibility. The Brussels slaughter bore its hallmarks -- an apparently retaliatory attack, carried out by members of a large Belgian cell, many of them trained in Syria, all living in a European country that has permitted Islamist terrorists to infiltrate its neighborhoods.
The message was clear: We can still hit you at will. Nothing that Western governments have done since Paris has changed that.
Belgium is among Europe's biggest per capita contributors of jihadis to Syria, who then drift back to wreak havoc. It is also an institutionally weak country suffering from poor intelligence and security coordination in the fight against a sophisticated enemy.
\"Terrorism struck Belgium, but it was Europe that was targeted, and everyone is concerned,\" said François Hollande, the French president. Yes, everyone is concerned, from California to the heart of Europe.
Syria, long regarded by the Obama administration as an intractable but parochial conflict, has proved the incubator of a global threat. From Raqqa, the Islamic State stronghold in Syria, terror radiates.
The dangerous thing about this territory, which the group calls a caliphate, is not so much its oil revenue, or training facilities, or proximity to the West, or control over several million people -- it is its magnetic assertion of Sunni jihadi power. The United States and Europe would not have accepted its existence in 2001. They would not have accepted that terrorists in a sanctuary close to a NATO border in Turkey could shut down a European city, as they did again today. But the years since 9/11, with their toll in blood and treasure, have been wearing.
Since the Paris attack, Obama has insisted that an anti-Islamic State coalition with European and other allies is getting the job done. More than 20 percent of the group's territory has been recaptured. The president has suggested that more radical military action to crush the militants -- essentially the deployment of infantry -- would drag the United States into another Middle Eastern war and increase the appeal of the Islamic State. His argument has been: Defeating the Islamic State is militarily feasible, but then what?
This is a very high-risk policy -- too high in my view. It allows the Islamic State to strut its pure evil in and from Raqqa. The Obama approach posits that the Islamic State can be beaten before European and American societies are undermined. Again today, speaking in Havana, he said, \"We will defeat those who threaten the safety and security of people all around the world.\" But the president does not say when victory will come against these forces he declined to identify, and time counts.
The Islamic State effect is powerful in psychological and political terms. Europe and the United States already bear scars. A united Europe, the great achievement of the second half of the 20th century, is in imminent danger of fraying. The latest attack will play into the hands of anti-European rightist politicians like Marine Le Pen, the leader of the French National Front. It will increase calls for borders to be reinstituted and the Schengen accord allowing free movement among more than two dozen European countries to be scrapped. It will challenge Europe's liberties.
By raising again the easily conflated specter of migration, Islam and terror, it will almost certainly bolster those campaigning to take Britain out of the European Union in a June referendum. The union is already fissuring as a result of a huge migrant flow from Syria and elsewhere, combined with an economic crisis.
In the United States, Islamic State terror also plays into the hands of demagogues, chief among them Donald Trump, with his call for a moratorium on Muslim immigration and his embrace of torture to fight terrorism. Fear is a potent political weapon. Many Americans are afraid, feeling that dim, uncontrollable forces have compromised their livelihoods, safety and futures. Trump was, of course, quick to seize on the attacks to reiterate his bellicose warnings.
\"This is going to happen in the United States,\" he said.
The San Bernardino, Calif., rampage by Islamic State sympathizers has already happened. The question raised most urgently by the Brussels attacks, so soon after Paris, is whether and why Raqqa can be tolerated when Al Qaeda's Tora Bora sanctuary in Afghanistan was not. There are no easy answers. But today at least the West's ponderous wait-them-out approach to the murderous fanatics of the caliphate looks like capitulation.
Word count: 875
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 23, 2016"
