"After the murderous attack on the offices of the satirical French magazine Charlie Hebdo in January 2015, \"Je suis Charlie\" became a rallying cry in France and across much of Europe in support of free speech and freedom of expression. It is a sad and depressing sequel to that display of solidarity that so many European nations seem willing today to curtail those same freedoms in the name of fighting terrorism.
As Raphael Minder of The Times reported from Madrid last week, a \"lengthening string of prosecutions\" across Europe offer alarming evidence that laws hurriedly enacted in the wake of terrorist attacks are being misused to stifle legitimate protest.
He cited the example of two puppeteers arrested in Madrid for a show that included a play on the names of Al Qaeda and ETA, the Basque separatist organization, as well as the conviction of the comedian Dieudonné M'bala M'bala in France for a Facebook post suggesting sympathy with one of the Charlie Hebdo gunmen.
Meanwhile, up to 100 people are under investigation in France under a new antiterrorism law for posting comments that appear to support terrorism; in Spain, a 21-year-old woman was recently convicted of inciting terrorism after she posted messages on Twitter calling on a radical far-left group to kill politicians.
These are not isolated cases, but the problem they point to is not simply one of misguided laws. The rise of international terrorist organizations and the ability of the terrorists to recruit and indoctrinate via the Internet and social media have created an indisputable threat to democratic societies, one that tests traditional boundaries between security and freedoms.
Even in the United States, where the Constitution proclaims that freedom of speech may be curbed only if it poses a \"clear and present danger,\" there is a legitimate debate about what this means in the context of the sort of horrific propaganda that ISIS has spread. In Europe, limits on what can be said or done in specific categories are not uncommon, such as laws in more than a dozen European nations that ban denial of the Holocaust.
Yet laws hastily adopted in the aftermath of a terror attack have a tendency to come back in forms not intended or foreseen. More dangerously, it seems an inevitable extension of Murphy's law that if a government is given unintended powers, those powers will be misused. The National Security Agency's misuse of its surveillance powers, as revealed by Edward Snowden, are a notorious example, and what future leaders might do is chillingly demonstrated by Donald Trump's suggestion that the United States should close parts of the Internet to combat terrorism -- and his postscript: \"Somebody will say, 'Oh freedom of speech, freedom of speech.' These are foolish people.\"
On the contrary, what is foolish is the rush to exploit fear and crisis to suppress the freedoms that define democracy -- the very freedoms Charlie Hebdo stood for and its attackers sought to undermine. There is no question that terrorism requires a robust response, but it cannot be used as justification for arbitrary and unfair laws.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
Credit: THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Word count: 549
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 29, 2016"
