"The latest \"prison census\" published by the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) states that 14 journalists were jailed in Turkey as of December. However, all these individuals, referred to as journalists, have actually been charged with serious crimes, such as armed robbery, killing of law enforcement officials and membership or support of illegal/armed terrorist organizations, including one that carried out the attacks on the U.S. Embassy in Ankara and the U.S. Consulate in Istanbul.
These crimes have nothing to do with journalism. Moreover, half of these individuals were not even credentialed by any media outlet, although they claim to be journalists. It should also be noted that four of the remaining half -- those in possession of media credentials -- had already been released as of last month.
In the same vein, the investigation concerning Can Dndar and Erdem Gl is not related to freedom of speech, and they are not under arrest because of their opinions. Dndar and Gl are charged with willfully aiding an armed terrorist organization without being members of it and disclosing confidential information related to the security of the state. They have been arrested due to the gravity of the charges but have not been convicted. They also have the right to appeal against any decision of the court.
Turkey is a democratic country governed by the rule of law. Separation of powers is safeguarded by the Constitution. Therefore, portraying these proceedings as an ill-intended attempt of the government to silence the opposition and the media is nothing more than disregarding and prejudging the investigations conducted by an independent judiciary in conformity with due process.
Finally, although the executive power has no say in these investigations, it is worth mentioning that right after the detention of Dndar and Gl, Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu stated publicly that a trial without arrest would have been better. This shows clearly that their arrest is neither the decision nor the preference of the Turkish government.
Serdar Kili is Turkey's ambassador to the United States.
Word count: 351
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
