"Fatima Charrihi, a Muslim mother of seven, was the first victim to be struck by a truck driver on a murderous rampage through a crowd of Bastille Day revelers Thursday. Several other Muslim residents of this French Riviera tourist spot perished in the attack by Muslim Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, who killed 84 people and injured 200.
Though they suffered losses from the horrific attack, many Muslims fear their entire community will be the target of blame, just as French Muslims were victims of hate crimes after two terror attacks in Paris in January and November 2015.
\"Life in Nice won't be the same again,\" said Nora Louzgani, 20, a university student from Morocco who was one of the thousands of celebrants on the waterfront when the truck drove over people for more than a mile before police shot Bouhlel dead.
Louzgani escaped unharmed, but she said she's traumatized. \"People are still going to the beach, there are lots of tourists, but that carefree summer mood isn't there anymore,\" she said.
Even as the southern French resort struggled to return to normal, authorities announced Sunday that they detained two more people, an unnamed man and woman, in connection with the attack, bringing to seven the number of suspects in police custody.
Oumama Kraimi, 21, another student, said she feared Muslims will be targeted again. \"There will be people who will stigmatize us,\" she said. \"We shouldn't let these people debase our image. The attack wasn't a Muslim act, only the act of an ignorant person who was hiding behind our religion, but who was not a real Muslim. The Quran tells us that if a man kills another, it's as if he had killed all of mankind.\"
Nice is one of the French cities that has seen the most Muslims become radicalized: more than 100 from the region have left to fight in Syria and Iraq, according to authorities who have monitored 236 individuals in recent months and track five new individuals every week.
Bouhlel, 31, a native of Tunisia who moved here several years ago, had not been under surveillance and may have been radicalized recently.
Otmane Assaoui, the imam at the Ar-Rahma Mosque and president of the Union of Muslims of the Alpes-Maritimes, said he hoped France would remain united against terrorism.
\"Like the other attacks in 2015, terrorists want to divide our nation, but we need to remain united,\" Assaoui said.
Credit: Elena Berton, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo VALERY HACHE, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 445
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
