"There are stories that prick at your soul, stories that hurt deep inside -- physically and emotionally -- so much that you just want to put them down and turn away.
As a journalist, you simply cannot do that. As a professional, you try to stay in a zone, doing your job by staying clinical and objective in your judgments as a shield against your own humanity, the sheer unadulterated pain that comes in the middle of such tragedy.
You try hard to stay in that zone. Then you see a video of friends of the victims of the worst mass shooting in U.S. history, their heads bowed in prayer, who are unable to even rise to their feet, and your own humanity returns.
From the time I answered my telephone in the early morning hours Sunday until I tried to close my eyes Sunday night, I fought to stay unemotional as dozens of other Florida Today and USA TODAY NETWORK journalists went about our duties in reporting on the unthinkable -- again.
The first time I experienced such a \"zone\" in my career was as a reporter in a small town in eastern Connecticut, when shots were fired as protesters converged on the site of a Ku Klux Klan rally in the early 1980s.
The idea that people were shooting at other people on the basis of who they were and what they believed was forever ingrained in my mind. This was no foreign war but happening in my own backyard, so to speak.
Then there was the time I covered a shooter firing from the woods across the street from the U.S. Navy submarine base in Groton, Conn. The shots were fired into the Bachelor Officer's Quarters. The idea of just shooting people, strangers, surfaced again.
There would be other incidents over the years, but nothing like Sept. 11, 2001, when attacks on Americans became a local story everywhere, changing all of us in so many ways forever. Suddenly, our two great oceans seemed not to offer the kind of protection we had imagined, our mighty military able to do only so much to keep our enemies, foreign and domestic, away.
Such attacks on Americans and others have become more commonplace since then: San Bernadino, Paris and Belgium, among others in the West.
Fighting back at times felt like being a boxer punching the air. Radicals' attacks happen even more frequently in Islamic nations, in places such as Quetta, Peshawar and an Islamabad neighborhood park.
The worst part of it all is that in the absence of being able to strike a real enemy, we've attacked other things and people, often each other.
The shooter at the Pulse nightclub was a 29-year-old American citizen born in New York of Afghan descent, who grew up and lived right down the road in the Treasure Coast of Florida. Yet social media post after social media post blamed things such as President Obama's immigration policy for Omar Mateen being in Orlando and killing Americans.
We create false enemies when we cannot reach the real ones. We blame all immigrants and all Muslims when the real enemy is the Islamic State and radical extremists. It is on those groups that we have to focus our energies and power. Unleash the full power of a united and determined nation, as we have when we come together against real threats. Let's stop punching at the air.
Reports surfaced that Mateen had been on federal authorities' watch lists and had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State. Yet somehow he had gotten security clearances. This is what happens when we punch at the air instead of mustering all our attention on our real foes.
By midday Sunday, Pakistani friends and journalism colleagues from my recent trip to strengthen journalism in the developing democracy were messaging me that they were praying for my safety and for the families of the victims, knowing only that America's latest terror incident was mere miles from my home.
How odd, I thought, that it was only a short while ago that I was messaging them the same good wishes as tragedy created by the same hateful enemy struck their nation.
These are the things that prick at your soul and hurt your heart.
Bob Gabordi is executive editor at Florida Today.
Illustration
photo Andrew West, The (Fort Myers, Fla.) News-Press
Word count: 766
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
