"OSLO -- He lives in a three-room suite with windows, about 340 square feet, that includes a treadmill, a fridge, a DVD player, a Sony PlayStation and a desk with a typewriter. He has been taking distance-learning courses at his country's main university. He has access to television, radio and newspapers. He prepares his own food, and he entered the Christmas gingerbread-house baking contest at his prison.
Anders Behring Breivik, the Norwegian extremist who was convicted of killing 77 people in a bomb and gun rampage in 2011, returned to court on Tuesday to pursue his claim that his solitary confinement -- albeit in cushy circumstances -- violates his human rights.
The hearing, at which Mr. Breivik gave a Nazi-style salute, has been accompanied by a new round of grief and outrage over the attacks, the deadliest violence in Norway since World War II.
Mr. Breivik, 37, was convicted of terrorism in 2012 and sentenced to 21 years in prison, though he can be held for longer if he is deemed a threat to society.
His case has strained Norway's commitment to tolerance and compassion, which includes a penal system that strongly emphasizes rehabilitation over punishment.
Since 2013, Mr. Breivik has been held in isolation at Skien, a high-security prison in southern Norway, after being transferred from Ila prison, outside Oslo.
Mr. Breivik has been complaining about his confinement since 2012 and at one point threatened to go on a hunger strike. Now he has sued the government, arguing that under the European Convention on Human Rights, long-term solitary confinement amounts to torture.
He is not permitted to communicate with other prisoners and has limited phone access. All of his letters, coming and going, are monitored and subject to censorship. He is allowed to spend one hour outside each day.
He is not allowed to leave the prison, and he could not attend his mother's funeral in 2013. He has also asserted that he has been subjected to degrading treatment, including hundreds of strip searches and frequent searches of his cell, including at night.
For security reasons, the proceedings, which are scheduled to last through Friday, are being held at the prison and are not being televised.
The prison's director, Ole Borlaug, told reporters that security for the case would be \"like an airport.\" The hearing is being held in the prison's gymnasium; the judge, Helen Andenaes Sekulic of the Oslo District Court, is using the prison's chapel as her office. Most journalists following the case are doing so via closed-circuit television transmission to the courthouse in Oslo.
\"This case is not, as many believe, a case being run in order to get Breivik back into the limelight,\" Mr. Breivik's lawyer, Oystein Storrvik, told the court on Tuesday. \"This is a case to determine the conditions for the remainder of his imprisonment.\"
The Norwegian Constitution prohibits capital punishment, but Mr. Storrvik has argued that solitary confinement can be even worse than a death sentence.
\"It is a big responsibility a state takes upon it when it chooses not to use capital punishment,\" he told the court.
Mr. Breivik did not speak at the hearing. He mostly stared at the stacks of documents in front of him while his lawyer spoke. Behind him were four uniformed security officers.
Marius Emberland, a lawyer for the government, said the conditions of Mr. Breivik's confinement were justified in light of the gravity of his crime, the risk of flight and the continuing threat he poses as a terrorist. He also noted that at least one other inmate had threatened Mr. Breivik.
\"Breivik is quite simply a very dangerous man,\" Mr. Emberland said, adding that Mr. Breivik had shown no sign of remorse.
Another government lawyer, Adele Matheson Mestad, told the judge that censorship of Mr. Breivik's correspondence was necessary to stop him from encouraging other extremists.
The massacre on July 22, 2011, began with a car bombing at a government building in Oslo that killed eight people, followed by the fatal shootings of 69 others at a Norwegian Labor Party youth retreat on the island of Utoya.
In a manifesto he drafted before the massacre, Mr. Breivik spoke of inciting a \"civil war\" in Europe and cited his animosity toward Muslims.
In interviews in Oslo, relatives of the victims condemned Mr. Breivik but expressed respect for the country's justice system.
\"He murdered our children, and now he is suing the state for the terms of his imprisonment,\" said Lisbeth Kristine Royneland, 51, whose daughter Synne, 18, was killed at Utoya, and who is now a spokeswoman for families of the victims.
\"But we understand that the trial is necessary,\" she said. \"Many of the families are today avoiding reading or watching the case in the media. Apart from myself, I only know two other parents who will be here today.\"
Ms. Royneland added: \"What I fear most today is that he gets a venue to spread his extreme-right message; that is what I hope to avoid. He is building a network, so that is what we fear. I hope he does not win the case.\"
Bjorn Ihler, 24, a Utoya survivor who followed the proceedings from the courthouse in Oslo, said that he had devoted himself since the attack to fighting extremism, and that he was enrolled in a master's program in peace and conflict studies.
Mr. Ihler has been credited with having saved the lives of two boys, ages 8 and 9 at the time. (Mr. Breivik shot at Mr. Ihler but missed.)
\"In 2012, I had to amass power to confront the Breivik I had imagined in my head, the monster Breivik,\" Mr. Ihler said, recalling the trial. \"But what I saw was just the man Breivik, small and weak. He is still just the man Breivik, only now older and with less hair.\"
He said he had no emotions about seeing Mr. Breivik again, not even about the Nazi-style salute.
\"I think it's important that we give him this trial,\" Mr. Ihler said. \"It is a victory in itself for us, as a society, not for him. Even terrorists have human rights. We have to keep in mind, though, that even though he is just one man, he represents an idea that we need to combat.\"
Eight witnesses, including psychiatric experts, prison officials and a government ombudsman, are scheduled to testify in the proceedings.
Norwegian politics have shifted to the right since Mr. Breivik's conviction. In 2013, a conservative-led alliance came into power, replacing a previous coalition of social democrats and environmentalists. The Progress Party, a right-wing party that opposes immigration and seeks to reduce taxes, and of which Mr. Breivik was a member for a number of years, is part of the new coalition.
Photograph
Anders Behring Breivik Gave a Nazi-Style Salute On Tuesday at a Court Hearing at Skien, a Prison in Southern Norway. Left, a Cell at Skien, Where Mr. Breivik has Been Held Since 2013. (Photographs by Lise Aserud/European Pressphoto Agency)
Word count: 1184
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 16, 2016"
