"In the midst of a tense standoff with police, Orlando nightclub gunman Omar Mateen calmly claimed credit for the massacre and identified himself as an \"Islamic soldier\" while calling on U.S. authorities to stop the bombing in Iraq and Syria, according to partial transcripts of the attacker's telephone contacts with dispatchers and crisis negotiators that were released Monday.
\"Praise be to God, and prayers, as well as peace, be upon the prophet of God,\" Mateen told a 911 dispatcher in Arabic just after 2:30 a.m. June12. \"I am in Orlando, and I did the shootings.\"
Mateen provided his full name during the 50-second call, then went on to pledge allegiance to the Islamic State and its leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. Justice Department officials initially redacted the reference to the terror group and its leader when the exchange was released Monday but changed course after a wave of criticism from GOP leaders.
House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., called the initial decision to edit the transcript \"preposterous.\"
\"We know the shooter was a radical Islamist extremist inspired by ISIS,\" Ryan said. \"We also know he intentionally targeted the LGBT community. The administration should release the full, unredacted transcript, so the public is clear-eyed about who did this and why.\"
Later, in a joint statement, Justice and FBI officials said they relented because the redactions had \"caused unnecessary distraction\" from the work of law enforcement authorities.
\"We also did not want to provide the killer or terrorist organizations with a publicity platform for hateful propaganda,\" according to the statement.
White House spokesman Josh Earnest said all decisions about the release of the transcript were made by the Justice Department.
A short summary of the gunman's communication during three calls with crisis negotiators indicated Mateen was asked what he had done inside the club, prompting an ominous warning to police.
\"No, you already know what I did,\" he said. \"There is some vehicle outside that has some bombs, just to let you know. You people are gonna get it, and I'm gonna ignite it if they try to do anything stupid.\" No explosives were found in the gunman's vehicle or in the club.
Word count: 379
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
