"ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Four militants, three of whom were suspects in a 2009 attack on the Sri Lankan cricket team, were fatally shot in Lahore, Pakistan, when another group of militants tried to free them from custody, the police said.
In the second of two statements about the shooting released on Sunday, the police said bullets fired by the attackers had killed the four men late Saturday.
The four men were also believed to have been involved in an attack later in 2009, a bomb and gunfire assault on Lahore's Moon Market that killed dozens of people that December. On Saturday, counterterrorism officers were taking them to a house where the plot was believed to have been planned and prepared, according to one of the police statements.
The officers had hoped \"to collect further evidence in the case,\" the statement said. But when they reached the Mian Town Bridge in North Lahore, seven other militants opened fire, according to the police.
The officers \"returned fire in self-defense,\" the statement said. \"When the firing stopped,\" it said, the four suspects had \"died by firing of the attacking terrorists.\"
The attackers fled, the statement added. The police gave no further details.
Three of the four dead men were suspects in the ambush of the cricket team in Lahore in March 2009. That commando-style ambush, which a former interior minister called \"a total security lapse,\" was a major embarrassment for Pakistan. It occurred after several other foreign teams had refused to play in the country, citing poor security.
At least a dozen militants, armed with assault rifles, grenades and antitank missiles, were waiting at a busy traffic circle when the bus carrying the Sri Lankan cricketers and their police escorts passed. Six police officers and two bystanders were killed, and six cricketers and an assistant coach were wounded. The militants escaped in motorized rickshaws.
The four men killed on Saturday were identified as Naik Muhammad, Abdul Wahab, Adnan Arshad and Ateequr Rehman. Officials said Mr. Muhammad, Mr. Wahab and Mr. Arshad had been involved in the attack on the Sri Lankans.
That assault is believed to have been carried out by a banned extremist group, Lashkar-e-Jhangvi. Malik Ishaq, the leader of that group, was killed in July of last year in a shootout with the police.
Pakistan is still ostracized by foreign cricket organizations, but the country's team has enjoyed great success, playing all of its home games on the road. And the sport remains an obsession among Pakistanis.
Imran Khan, a former captain of the Pakistani cricket team, is now a leading opposition politician, his high political profile owing to his long-ago successes on the playing field.
Word count: 456
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 29, 2016"
