"A Rochester man pleaded guilty on Thursday in federal court to conspiring to provide material support to the Islamic State after he was charged with preparing a New Year's Eve 2015 attack at a local club or bar, prosecutors said.
The man, Emanuel L. Lutchman, 26, was accused in December of gathering knives, a machete, ski masks and zip ties as part of his plan to wage the attack and to possibly kidnap some people and kill them. He was taking advantage of what a self-identified Islamic State member overseas described as his position \"behind enemy lines,\" according to the plea agreement.
Mr. Lutchman faces a maximum of 20 years in prison and a lifetime of supervised release. Sentencing is set for Nov. 15.
As part of his guilty plea, Mr. Lutchman admitted that he conspired with a member of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, in Syria and planned to stage the attack, which could then be claimed by the group and help him gain membership to the terrorist organization, prosecutors said.
In late December, Mr. Lutchman was communicating with three other people who were cooperating with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
According to court documents, he expressed support for the Islamic State in postings on social media and watched terrorism-related videos. Prosecutors said Mr. Lutchman maintained a digital collection of documents related to terrorism, including all of the issues of Inspire magazine -- an online publication by Al Qaeda -- and other documents meant to guide individuals seeking to engage in lone wolf terrorist attacks in the United States and elsewhere.
The criminal complaint described how his hatred of life in the United States motivated Mr. Lutchman's attempts to contact ISIS sympathizers and to pull together support for the plot, despite not having enough money to buy basic weapons or apparently much expertise in carrying out an attack.
He admitted that on Dec. 30, 2015, he made a video pledging allegiance to the Islamic State and, referring to the planned attack, asked Allah to \"make this a victory,\" officials said in a statement. In the video, Mr. Lutchman covered all of his face except for his eyes and he held one index finger in the air, a sign commonly used by ISIS members and supporters, prosecutors said.
Word count: 393
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 12, 2016"
