"ISTANBUL -- A Turkish member of the Islamic State was the perpetrator of a suicide bombing that killed four foreigners in Istanbul over the weekend, the Turkish interior minister said on Sunday.
The attacker, who struck in Istanbul's central Istiklal Avenue on Saturday morning, has been identified as Mehmet Ozturk, a Turkish citizen born in 1992 in the southern city of Gaziantep, Efkan Ala, the interior minister, said in a televised news conference.
Three Israeli citizens and an Iranian were killed in the attack. Dozens more were injured.
An Israeli military plane flew the bodies of the Israeli victims home on Sunday for burial. They were identified as Simha Damri, 60, a grandmother from the southern town of Dimona; Avraham Goldman, 69, a tour guide from Herzliya; and Yonathan Shor, 40, a Tel Aviv resident who worked in the technology industry. Mr. Goldman and Mr. Shor, who was also identified as Yonathan Suher by the State Department, held dual Israeli-American citizenship.
Israel's deputy foreign minister, Tzipi Hotovely, told Army Radio on Sunday that there was no information to suggest the suicide bombing was specifically directed at Israelis.
The bombing was the fourth such attack in Turkey this year, and it underscores the country's growing vulnerability as it fights in conflicts on two fronts -- one against the Islamic State in Syria, the other against Kurdish insurgents at home.
The Islamic State has not claimed responsibility for any attacks in Turkey, but officials said the group was responsible for a suicide bombing in Istanbul's historic tourist district in January that killed 10 people, most of them Germans. Officials also linked the group to the worst terrorist attack in Turkey's modern history, in which 103 people were killed during a peace rally in Ankara, the capital, in October.
Turkish officials say the Islamic State has started to target Turkey because of its increased cooperation with the United States-led coalition that is fighting the group in Syria. As a part of that effort, Turkey has also cracked down on thousands of foreign fighters trying to cross its border into Syria.
When the bomber struck on Istanbul's busiest thoroughfare on Saturday, the country was still reeling from a car bombing in central Ankara last week that killed 37 people. A splinter group of the Kurdistan Workers' Party, or P.K.K., claimed responsibility for that attack.
Kurdish militants have waged a three-decade insurgency against the Turkish state for autonomy, and the violence has increased in Turkey since the breakdown of a fragile peace process in July, followed by a major counterinsurgency campaign.
On Sunday, many roads in Istanbul were cordoned off for security reasons, and television footage showed the usually bustling Istiklal Avenue virtually abandoned. Photographs showed several people placing red carnations at the scene of the attack.
A soccer game between two major teams on Sunday was postponed after a serious security threat, the Istanbul governor's office said in a statement.
The United States Embassy warned Americans to avoid crowded places ahead of Sunday's Kurdish spring festival, Nevroz. The Turkish government banned Nevroz events in major cities because of security concerns.
Credit: TIM ARANGO and CEYLAN YEGINSU; Tim Arango reported from Istanbul, and Ceylan Yeginsu from Canakkale, Turkey. Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from Jerusalem.
Word count: 550
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 21, 2016"
