"BERLIN -- Hundreds of police officers remained on alert in Munich on Friday after a threat of a suicide bombing attack by the Islamic State led the authorities to evacuate two train stations on New Year's Eve.
The German authorities said Friday that five to seven people might have been involved in the terrorist threat. The two stations, in the city center and in the Pasing district in the western part of Munich, have reopened as the authorities continue to investigate.
Yet with little to go on and no arrests nearly 24 hours later, officials in Bavaria were defending their decision to close the two transit hubs hours before midnight and to flood the city with heavily armed, specially equipped officers -- 550 as of Friday morning, including reinforcements from other parts of the southern state.
They said they had received a \"very concrete tip\" around 7:40 p.m. from intelligence sources in France and the United States indicating that militants from Iraq and Syria were planning to carry out attacks. By midday Friday, the immediate threat of an imminent attack had been lifted, although the police remained on general alert, said Joachim Herrmann, interior minister of Bavaria.
Extra precautions had already been put in place across the Continent for New Year's Eve celebrations, less than two months after Islamist militants carried out a series of bloody attacks in and near Paris. New Year's festivities were canceled in Brussels, the seat of many European Union institutions, with extra precautions in place in Austria, France and the Netherlands after the warnings.
Senior security officials in Washington and in European capitals said American intelligence agencies had played a major role in detecting possible plots in the days leading up to the year-end holidays and in sharing information.
\"Last night's threat was so specific that we couldn't wait to determine whether it was serious or not, but had to act,\" Mr. Herrmann said.
Hubertus Andrä, chief of the Munich police, said Friday that no one had been arrested and that the authorities were unsure if the people whose names they had been given were even in the country.
\"The names that were given to us are being checked, the extent to which these people are in Germany and what German intelligence officials know about these people is part of the ongoing, intense investigation,\" Mr. Hermann told the Bavarian public television station BR on Friday.
The Munich police refused to give further information, citing the continuing investigation.
\"The situation in Europe and in Germany remains serious in the new year,\" Thomas de Maizière, the interior minister, said on Friday. \"Since the attacks in Paris, we have received several hints. Federal and state security services are following up on these indications, including of possible planned attacks.\"
Germany has not experienced the sort of attacks that were carried out in Madrid in 2004, London in 2005 and Paris last year, but the authorities in Berlin warn that the country remains a possible target, most notably because of its military presence in Afghanistan.
In 2015, the German authorities called off the popular Eschborn-to-Frankfurt bike race scheduled for May in response to information about a potential attack, and they arrested a German-Turkish couple who had been storing weapons in their home.
Days after the Paris attacks on Nov. 13, which included suicide bombings at a soccer match between the German and French national teams, a game in Hanover between Germany and the Netherlands was called off hours before kickoff because of a suspicious package.
The authorities in Munich said the police would conduct identity checks and asked that residents be patient with the increased security measures.
One resident, Oliver Habel, said that he had spent New Year's Eve in a restaurant in the southern part of the city, and that he learned about the terrorism scare only Friday morning. \"I am very confident in the security measurements in Bavaria, so I am not concerned,\" he said.
Other European countries also continued to take possible security threats seriously. Terminal 3 at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol was evacuated on Friday after a British man shouted that he had a bomb, although none was found. The man was arrested.
In Russia, the state-run news agency RIA Novosti said that about 500 people had been evacuated from two train stations in Moscow after the police were told that bombs had been planted. No explosive devices were found.
The Belgian authorities announced the release Friday of three more people in connection with a suspected plot to carry out attacks in Brussels on New Year's Eve, according to The Associated Press. Three people have already been released, but two others were still being held, the news agency reported.
In the southeastern French city of Valence, a man rammed his car into four soldiers guarding a mosque on Friday but was stopped when a soldier fired and wounded him, French authorities said, according to The Associated Press.
Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.
Credit: MELISSA EDDY; Katarina Johannsen contributed reporting.
Photograph
Officers at the Central Train Station in Munich On Friday, a Day After Two Transit Hubs Were Evacuated Because of a Terrorist Threat. (Photograph by Michaela Rehle/Reuters)
Word count: 901
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 2, 2016"
