"An unprecedented 40-nation summit on combating the Islamic State focused Thursday on bolstering the military campaign against the extremist group and countering propaganda it spreads to recruit fighters from around the world.
\"We are engaged in a historic effort,\" Secretary of State John Kerry said of the anti-Islamic State coalition. \"Nothing like this coalition has ever before been assembled. We're not following a manual on anti-terror activities. We're writing it.\"
Defense Secretary Ash Carter said the meeting is the first held together with both foreign and defense ministers.
\"We now have momentum on the ground with clear results,\" Carter said. \"And this week we're making further plans, clear commitments to help us destroy\" the Islamic State, also known as ISIL.
He said the coalition's first priority is \"to destroy the ISIL tumor,\" but that isn't enough. The coalition also plans to help police and local security forces prevent terrorist attacks at home, he said.
Kerry said after the day-long session that the ministers discussed recent accomplishments against the Islamic State and plans to retake the militant group's last major strongholds of Mosul in Iraq and Raqqa in Syria.
But the bulk of the meeting focused on how to deal with the Islamic State after it is defeated as an organization that holds territory and morphs into a terrorist group bent on spreading death and destruction, Kerry said.
Countering the Islamic State in the future will require greater sharing of intelligence and information, \"so police and border guards of coalition countries know if someone has been to Iraq,\" Kerry said.
He also announced Thursday that Interpol became a member of the coalition. The international police organization will help member nations interdict foreign terrorist fighters returning from conflict areas and aid to interrupt terrorist networks.
Kerry earlier said the ministers heard a briefing by Director of National Intelligence James Clapper that described the Islamic State's battlefield losses and its plans for the future.
The coalition's work has retaken half the territory once held by the Islamic State, Kerry said. Airstrikes disrupted the militant group's ability to conduct military operations, and the joint effort has \"squeezed (Islamic State) revenue streams\" by targeting its oil storage sites, tanker trucks and oil production sites, he said.
\"In the face of such setbacks, the number of fighters have gone down by a third, recruiting has slowed, and defections have increased,\" Kerry said.
Kerry opened the event with German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, who co-hosted a funding conference Wednesday that raised $2.1billion to help Iraq restore stability to territory it regained from the Islamic State.
The ministers have come \"to take stock of where we are\" in the campaign and to focus on the next steps, especially retaking Mosul, the second largest city in Iraq, said Brett McGurk, who is President Obama's special envoy to the coalition.
\"Mosul is now increasingly coming upon us. We have it in sight, but we have to do it right,\" McGurk said. \"Militarily, it has to be very well planned. We have to have a stabilization plan ready to go and resourced. We have to have a humanitarian plan ready to go and resourced. The local governance plan has to be ready to go.\"
McGurk, speaking Tuesday to reporters on a conference call, said the ministers will focus on the fight against the Islamic State in three dimensions: Taking back territory in Iraq and Syria, tracking and countering the Islamic State's foreign fighter and propaganda networks, and stabilization and governance in areas liberated from the militant group.
Credit: Oren Dorell, @orendorell, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo US STATE DEPARTMENT via EPA
Word count: 634
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
