"It's already been a rough few months for Belgian Muslims in the wake of November's terrorist attacks in Paris and the search for suspects in Belgium: lockdowns, increased security and raids on homes.
Now, in the wake of the country's deadliest terrorist attacks Tuesday, Muslims fret that more fear, suspicion and harassment are on the way.
Recent anti-Muslim rallies in Flemish cities such as Antwerp and Ghent have been relatively small, but they may grow and become violent, said Nabil Riffi, an attorney of Moroccan descent who lives in Antwerp. \"My fear is that they will draw more people to them because the danger is now among us,\" he said.
\"I think the possibility of the Pegida rallies in Flanders getting violent is real,\" he said, referring to an anti-migrant, anti-Muslim movement that started in Germany and has spread to other countries in Europe.
The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the bombings at Brussels Airport and a central metro station that killed 31 and injured 250. Two suicide bombers died in the attack, and a massive manhunt is underway for a third suspect caught on video cameras fleeing the airport. An arrest was made Wednesday but apparently not the man on the video.
The search focuses on the Schaerbeek neighborhood of Brussels, which has a significant Muslim population.
In one raid Tuesday, investigators found an explosive device containing nails that was similar to the type of bomb used in at least one of the two blasts at the airport. They also found a black Islamic State flag, according to Belgian media, which cited prosecutors.
Some of those suspected of involvement in the Paris attacks Nov. 13, which killed 130 people, reside in Belgium. Abdelhamid Abaaoud, 27, a Belgian national named by French authorities as the likely plotter of the attacks, was captured last Friday in a raid in Brussels.
Belgium has one of the largest Muslim communities in Europe: about 6% of 11 million Belgians. It is the largest contributor of fighters to the Islamic State. More than 500 Belgian nationals have traveled to join the extremist group in Syria and Iraq, according to Belgian intelligence estimates.
Leaders of Belgium's Muslim community, which condemned Tuesday's attacks, say the perpetrators' intention is to create social divisions and a backlash against Muslims that can aid in the recruitment of newly radicalized fighters.
\"These dramatic events in the heart of Europe undermine the efforts of society and the full Muslim community in Belgium to harmoniously live together,\" the Executive of Muslims in Belgium, the main Muslim community organization in the country, said in a statement. \"That is why, in the name of all Muslim citizens, the EMB calls for unity and unanimity to together establish a coalition against violence and terrorism.\"
Belgian Muslims said the perpetrators and supporters of terrorist attacks represent a tiny portion of the millions of Muslims across Europe who condemn such violence.
\"I hope that people will realize this has nothing to do with the real Islam and that 99% of Muslims very much are distancing themselves from what happened (Tuesday), and they also really are reeling,\" attorney Riffi said.
Thompson reported from Berlin.
Credit: Linda A. Thompson, and Delfine Reuter, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Aurore Belot, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 562
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
