"In February 2013, Barack Obama promised that the United States would withdraw half its troops from Afghanistan over the course of the year. It was a popular decision. This was, after all, part of what he'd been elected to do.
What few Americans thought to ask was whether the United States had any kind of ethical obligation to the people of Afghanistan -- its women especially -- who had for a time lived without the oppression of the Taliban, and had perhaps gone to school, or discovered the Internet, or gotten better access to health care. They were now left to face the Taliban again. Did the Americans not owe them something?
Or, as the journalist and development worker Jeffrey E. Stern puts it: \"When we launch our foreign wars do we inevitably raise in people the desire for things they cannot have forever?\"
This moral tension animates and complicates Mr. Stern's beautiful, meticulously reported debut, \"The Last Thousand: One School's Promise in a Nation at War.\" In the immediate aftermath of President Obama's announcement, Mr. Stern carefully monitors the fate of both the Marefat School, an outpost of humanism in a Kabul slum, and its indomitable founder, Aziz Royesh. As the months tick away, what becomes depressingly clear is that every ideal the institution stands for -- free inquiry, equal rights for women and ethnic minorities -- will be in jeopardy once American troops are reduced.
And that's if they are merely reduced. As the year wears on, it seems increasingly possible that the United States will eventually leave none.
\"If the zero option happens, Jeff, that's the end of Afghanistan,\" Mr. Royesh says in a rare storm of distress. \"Why would America do that? There is no reason to throw all our achievements on the ground and just go!\"
Marefat began in the mid-1990s as a modest classroom of just a dozen students in Pakistan, where Mr. Royesh had sought refuge during the rise of the Taliban. He transplanted it to Kabul after the American invasion in 2001. His grand ambition, in Mr. Stern's words, was \"to change people's minds.\"
He's not just speaking idiomatically. Mr. Royesh wanted his students to reconsider their opinions, certainly, but he also wanted them to reconsider the way they thought and learned. His aim was to make them interrogate, not regurgitate; to make them tolerate the discomfort of ambiguity rather than seek the convenient shelter of dogma.
In a country riven by ethnic and religious differences, this amounted to no less than a revolution, and selling parents on the virtues of free thought required a sly ingenuity. One of the great pleasures of reading \"The Last Thousand\" is learning how intrepid idealists like Mr. Royesh -- who never made it past fifth grade and raised himself on a diet of Western and Middle Eastern literature -- will their visions into something real.
Knowing that many parents would resist his humanist curriculum, he \"hid it within a Trojan horse of religion, cherry-picking ideas from the holy book that best fed the mind-set he wanted for his students.\"
Knowing fathers would resist the very notion of literacy for girls, Mr. Royesh convinced them that their daughters would appreciate in value if they were educated because they'd find better husbands. \"He didn't go into homes as a proselytizer,\" Mr. Stern writes. \"He went in as an investment manager.\"
Knowing the Ministry of Education would not recognize a school that embraced coeducation, he segregated his classrooms by gender, reluctantly.
And it worked. He created an institution with close to 4,000 students. It became one of the top schools in the country, sending its brightest to Harvard, Brown and Northwestern.
Even more astonishing, the students, like Mr. Royesh, were all Hazaras, a despised Shiite minority in Afghanistan, \"the only tribe for whom oppression has been institutionalized.\" (Some histories, probably not reliable, consider them descendants of 1,000 Mongols left behind by Genghis Khan; hence \"the last thousand\" in the book's title.) They were slaves in the late 19th century; in the 20th, they were banned from universities, civil service jobs and owning property in certain places. Yet now, here they were, university bound.
But then the United States announced it was drawing down its troops. By the end of 2014, only 9,800 would be left.
One of the most dramatic elements of \"The Last Thousand\" is how Mr. Royesh adapts to this new and terrifying reality. As the world closes in around him -- with explosives going off at alarming rates around the city, suicide bombers suddenly infesting his neighborhood, terrorists and politicians alike singling out Hazaras for persecution -- he lurches between encouraging compliance and defiance in his pupils, at one point becoming so desperate that he urges the girls to find husbands. (They respond with bewilderment, indignation, rage.) His head swims:
\"So what do you do? Teach them to be realistic? Teach them a fiction so at least they don't worry? Keep teaching them to fight for their rights out of principle, even if it will only get them hurt?\"
Mr. Stern's narrative, though propelled by President Obama's deadline, sails back and forth across time. We see the school at its inception and learn how its existence was always fragile; we meet Cassandras who warn the teacher that the United States might one day forsake him. (Among them is Michael Metrinko, an American political officer who was among the hostages taken in the United States Embassy in Iran in 1979.) We also meet a number of students and Marefat personnel whose lives Mr. Royesh has irreversibly changed.
Some of the profiles of these characters don't go anywhere in particular -- they can feel like a series of set pieces, meant for individual placement in magazines -- nor does \"The Last Thousand\" march toward any single momentous event. The book has its share of detours and roundabouts.
But to anyone with even a passing interest in Afghanistan, I'm not sure it matters. Mr. Stern has a gift for exposition, explaining the confusing geopolitics of the region with a blessed -- and welcome -- lucidity. He knows exactly when to break the fourth wall, strategically entering the narrative to express his own anxieties about the fate of the school, the girls, the country. And he writes with real compassion and texture. (Favorite image: When bald heads become a trend among the boys at Marefat, \"it has the effect of making the halls look like an upturned cart of potatoes tumbling toward the door whenever the bell rings.\")
The region is also still in chaos. So perhaps it's to Mr. Stern's credit that he doesn't impose a false sense of resolution where there simply isn't any.
What will endure for me is the image of Mr. Royesh, trying to change his country's politics absent American help. It's no wonder that Gen. John R. Allen, the commander of international security forces in Afghanistan at the time of Mr. Obama's announcement, developed a real affection for the schoolmaster during his tenure, personally donating enough money to Marefat to fund 25 scholarships.
\"For a man like General Allen, the service the Teacher provides is validation,\" Mr. Stern writes. \"He's the one they can point to and say, 'Here is a thing those good kids died for. Here's why it wasn't all a waste.\"'
The Last Thousand
One School's Promise in a Nation at War
Jeffrey E. Stern
325 pages. St. Martin's Press. $26.99.
Photograph
Photo (C1); Photo (Photograph by Nasim Fekrat) (C4)
Word count: 1270
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 8, 2016"
