"Julie Landau and his family will gather on Wednesday at the grave of his son, Yair, an Israeli soldier killed in action in 1982 at age 23.
Two weeks before Americans mark their own Memorial Day, people in Israel will mark Memorial Day. Those being remembered include 350 North Americans or their children and spouses, seven more than last year, according to the Association of Americans and Canadians in Israel.
Landau, who moved from Brooklyn, N.Y., to Jerusalem in 1969, is one of the hundreds of bereaved American and Canadian citizens whose loved ones died in the service of Israel's military or in Israel-based terror attacks.
Restaurants and places of entertainment will close, hundreds of thousands will flock to military cemeteries and people all over the country will stand for a moment of silence as two air-raid sirens wail.
\"In Israel, Memorial Day is almost comforting,\" Landau said. \"The military cemeteries are so crowded you can barely stand. Everyone, the bereaved and non-bereaved, recognizes the memory of those who fell.\"
Some of the country's 23,000 fallen soldiers were non-Israeli volunteers, including non-Jews, according to Donna Grushka, an AACI volunteer who co-runs the organization's annual memorial ceremony.
\"There were volunteers who fought in Israel's War of Independence in 1948. Some had fought in Europe during World War II and were influenced by what they saw -- the concentration camps, the survivors, the refugees.\"
One of them is David \"Micky\" Marcus, a Jewish U.S. Army colonel who, along with hundreds of other North American Machal soldiers, served in Europe before volunteering to train and fight alongside Israel's fledgling army as it battled invading Arab armies.
Marcus, whose service to Israel is portrayed in the film Cast a Giant Shadow, was killed by friendly fire.
To this day, Machal, the IDF's volunteer program, allows non-Israelis and Israeli expatriates to serve in combat, usually for 18 months. The vast majority are \"lone soldiers,\" the designation the IDF gives to 6,000 soldiers whose parents do not live in Israel. Roughly 1,000 hail from the USA, according to the military.
At least two of the program's Americans, Max Steinberg of Woodland Hills, Calif., and Sean Carmeli of South Padre Island, Texas, were among the Israeli soldiers killed during Israel's 2014 war with Hamas, the militant group that governs Gaza.
The fact that Israeli Memorial Day includes terror victims is comforting to Zahava Gilmore, a New Jersey native who moved to Israel in 1970. Her son Esh Kodesh Gilmore, a 25-year-old American-Israeli security guard, was murdered by a Palestinian in 2000.
Gilmore said Memorial Day in Israel is \"draining\" because it is so all-encompassing, \"but it's also very healing.\"
Although her son was not an active-duty soldier at the time of his death, on Memorial Day, Gilmore makes a point of going to the military cemetery in Jerusalem where Yair Landau is buried.
Her son is not buried there because he was not on active duty. Yet she goes because \"I'm with others in my situation,\" she said. \"The most moving part of the ceremony is singing (Israel's national anthem) Hatikva. It's a song about the continuation of our people. The tragedy ends with hope, not just sorrow.\"
Risa Rotman, the Canadian-born widow of terror victim Chaim (Howard) Rotman, also a Canadian, said she is torn about what to do during her first year of Memorial Day bereavement.
In November 2014, Palestinians armed with a gun, axes and meat cleavers attacked her husband and killed four other worshipers as well as a policeman in a Jerusalem synagogue. Rotman, the father of 11, died nearly a year later.
\"We are ultra-Orthodox Jews and ultra-Orthodox Jews mourn the dead on Tisha B'Av, a Jewish fast day that commemorates the destruction of the ancient Jewish Temples,\" Rotman explained.
\"But my husband was a government employee, and his colleagues are planning to honor his life on Memorial Day. I will likely attend because it's important to them and I want to respect their sensibilities.\"
For New Yorker Sherri Mandell, an American-Israeli whose son Koby Mandell, 13, was murdered in 2001, Memorial Day is a day \"when other people remember. It's not my Memorial Day. It's like having one day when everything stops, but we live with our son's death all the time. Nobody can know what it's like to lose a child to terror or war unless they have lived it. No one understands the 'foreverness.'\"
Mandell and her husband, Seth, created the Koby Mandell Foundation, which runs programs for bereaved families. Her son's death \"has, if anything, made us Israeli,\" she said. \"Koby is buried here. We're not going to leave him or bring his body back to America. It's planted us here.\"
Credit: Michele Chabin, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Abir Sultan, european pressphoto agency
Word count: 837
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
