"Germany is on edge following a string of attacks by refugees, including a 27-year-old Syrian man who pledged allegiance to the Islamic State before blowing himself up outside an open-air music festival in the southern part of the country.
The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the bombing, which left 15 people wounded in Ansbach on Sunday evening.
The bombing was the fourth attack in Germany in a week. The worst was Friday's mass shooting at a Munich shopping mall by a mentally disturbed German-Iranian teenager that left nine dead before the gunman killed himself.
The gunman, Ali David Sonboly, 18, who was born in Germany, was fascinated by mass shootings and had no apparent connection to the Islamic State.
\"The people of Germany are afraid because these events have happened on an unthinkable timeline,\" said Rainer Wendt, chairman of the German police union.
Wendt blamed the country's \"open door\" policy toward refugees, which allowed more than a million asylum seekers to enter Germany last year, according to the German daily Die Welt.
Early Sunday, a 21-year-old Syrian refugee killed a pregnant woman with a machete in the town of Reutlingen. The first attack in this series happened when a 17-year-old Afghan refugee wielding an ax wounded five on a train in Wrzburg on July 18.
The German government cautioned the public Monday not to make generalizations about refugees and not to assume all the attacks are related to terrorism.
Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziere insisted the nation's \"welcome culture\" has nothing to do with these attacks.
\"In both the cases of Ansbach and Reutlingen, the attackers had gone through a full asylum application and security check,\" de Maiziere said. \"We can't rule out a connection to the Islamic State, as well as we can't rule out that this was a lone-wolf attack. We have to let the authorities do their work.\"
Authorities ruled out terrorist motives for the Friday shooting in Munich, but investigations into Sunday's attacks are still ongoing.
Credit: Angela Waters, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Christof Stache, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 373
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
