"The world has had lots to say about French communities that banned the full-body burkini swimsuit worn by some Muslim women. This has been amplified by a photograph of French policemen forcing a Muslim woman to show some skin on a beach in Nice, which bars clothing that \"overtly manifests adherence to a religion at a time when France and places of worship are the target of terrorist attacks.\"
All this seems barbaric to many Americans -- a clear violation not only of the free exercise of religion guaranteed by the Constitution, but also of the liberte and egalite the French supposedly hold dear. Amid the tsk-tsking, it is important to remember that these burkini bans, like the 2011 French law outlawing headgear that covers the face, are not so different from American garb laws wielded against Catholics in the not-so-distant past.
In the late 19th century, several states passed laws, obviously aimed at Catholic nuns, that forbade teachers from wearing clerical garb in public schools. Today, such statutes remain on the books in Pennsylvania and Nebraska, where they effectively bar not only many Catholic clerics but also Muslim women with headscarves from serving as public school teachers.
France and the United States are both products of 18th century revolutions, and both separated church and state in an effort to avoid revisiting the bloody religious wars of early modern Europe. But they negotiated that divorce in different ways. The French exiled almost all expressions of religion to the private realms of home and church. Here in the U.S., by contrast, the power of any one denomination would be restrained by the presence of other denominations competing for adherents in full public view.
Now, as University of Virginia professor Douglas Laycock has observed, France and the United States are \"like distant cousins who have lost contact.\" While France sought to create a secular nation, America created a multireligious one.
Far too often, however, Americans have meddled in the free market they created. Courts interpret religion not only in Christian but also in Protestant terms, downplaying the rituals traditionally valued by Catholics and Jews. And all but one U.S. president (the Catholic John F. Kennedy) has been at least a nominal Protestant.
Many Americans continue to discriminate not only against the public expression of Islam but also against what have traditionally been its private preserves. In the liberal Democratic stronghold of Massachusetts, Dudley residents have prevented the conversion of a dilapidated farm into an Islamic cemetery. Meanwhile, the standard-bearer of America's other leading political party has called for a temporary ban on the entry of Muslims into the USA.
Americans certainly have every right to criticize efforts by French municipalities to replace burkinis with bikinis. But as we jeer at the secular sexism of the French, we should not forget that there is still plenty of work to do here at home.
Stephen Prothero is a professor of religion at Boston University.
Word count: 509
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
