"CHARLESTON, S.C. -- A year after nine members of a historic black church were killed here, politicians and pastors joined with congregations from around the region on Friday to mark the occasion with prayers, tambourines and clapping hands, but also with impassioned, almost desperate calls for action in the face of unceasing gun violence.
A memorial service at the TD Arena on Friday morning mourned the victims and evoked the glory of God dozens of times to shouts of \"Amen\" from the crowd. But it was the demand for greater restrictions on the nation's guns that drew the loudest applause from the mostly black audience.
\"Words alone, no matter how sincere or well intended, cannot be substituted for sustained and meaningful action,\" Mayor John Tecklenburg said at the event. \"Can't we at least remove the availability of assault weapons from those who have broken the law? Those who have mental issues? Can't we at least complete reasonable background checks?\"
The ceremony played out against the vitriol and division of the presidential election and came less than a week after yet another atrocity, the massacre of 49 people at a gay club in Orlando, Fla. Like the shooting in Charleston and the many before it, that attack has renewed debate over the nation's gun laws, which remain a point of fierce contention even here, where grief over the killings at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church is still raw.
None of the Republican speakers at the event said anything about guns. In her remarks, Gov. Nikki R. Haley said, \"I don't have anything political to say.\"
Instead, she called for unity, invoking the victims, who invited the white supremacist accused in their killing, Dylann Roof, into their sanctuary and prayed with him for an hour before he opened fire.
\"There are people who are going to want to divide us,\" Ms. Haley said. \"And it's all the more reason to remember these people who talked about love and acceptance.\"
It was a much smaller and less illustrious crowd than a year ago, when 6,000 mourners packed the arena to eulogize the church's murdered pastor in a ceremony that culminated in President Obama's singing of \"Amazing Grace.\" That gathering was marked by a rare flash of political comity, bringing together the likes of Hillary Clinton, then beginning her campaign for the Democratic nomination to the presidency, and John A. Boehner, a Republican on the verge of ending his tenure as speaker of the House of Representatives.
Many here insist that despite the acrimonious political climate in the country today, the good will and unity that arose in South Carolina after the shooting remains, if only in interactions among people in the street.
\"Any given day, there's someone outside the church taking pictures, saying a prayer, leaving a token of love,\" said the Rev. Betty Deas Clark, who has assumed leadership of the church. \"And so all of those things helps us to know that we're not in this by ourselves.\"
Only the most dedicated parishioners remained at the church that evening on June 17, 2015, when Mr. Roof, a stranger to those inside, came to the door asking for the minister, investigators said. He was admitted and welcomed into the basement for Bible study, where he lingered for more than an hour as the group sang and prayed. Then, according to investigators, about 9 o'clock, he pulled out a .45 caliber pistol and opened fire, killing nine, including the pastor, the Rev. Clementa C. Pinckney, who was also a Democratic state senator. Three survived.
In a moment, the church and Charleston were changed forever, and reverberations from the shooting and its implications for race relations in the United States were felt nationwide. If blacks were not safe even in their own church, how far had the country really come since the civil rights era?
The fierce debate that followed led to the removal of the Confederate battle flag from the grounds of the State House. But few would call the issue of race settled. It has underpinned the region's politics for hundreds of years.
State Representative Robert L. Brown, a Democrat, said that while race relations had improved since the shooting, he was frustrated by the deep poverty of many black communities as predominantly white areas have prospered.
\"Lowering the flag -- that's just the beginning,\" he said. \"There's a list of needs. Damage from last year's storm. Insurance problems from it. Failing septic tanks. Bad water wells. Expanding Medicaid so people in my district can be insured.\"
There are perhaps more reverberations ahead. The first of two death penalty trials for Mr. Roof, set to begin in November, could reignite the fierce racial debates that broke out after the shooting. Federal prosecutors have said that Mr. Roof, 22, \"expressed hatred and contempt towards African-Americans\" and showed no remorse. Mr. Roof himself has said that he carried out the attack to foment a race war.
Race relations could be further strained by the October trial of a white police officer accused of killing an unarmed black motorist, Walter Scott, during a traffic stop last year.
And then there is the gun issue.
Efforts to strengthen restrictions on gun sales since the shooting have had little traction in Congress or the South Carolina Legislature. These include a bill that would expand background checks and a measure that would make it harder for people who are on or have been on terrorist watch lists to buy a firearm.
Here, much of the discussion has centered on the so-called Charleston loophole, a federal provision that allows buyers to purchase a gun after a three-day waiting period, regardless of whether a background check has been completed. Because of a drug arrest, Mr. Roof would have been barred from buying the weapon used in the attack, but his background check was not completed in time.
At the TD Arena, Debra Young and a group of five friends, who had driven 100 miles from Columbia for the event, said they were heartened by the politicians and clergy members who spoke out about gun violence.
\"They said the same thing I was thinking,\" Ms. Young said. \"You can't even take water on a plane? That's bad? But you can't ban assault weapons?\"
Later, a multiracial crowd gathered at Emanuel A.M.E. Church for an event coordinated by the Civilitas Group, a coalition of pastors, university presidents and journalists that formed after the massacre.
There were discussions of faith, forgiveness and the burden of America's racial history. The names of the dead were read one last time. And again, the focus found its way to guns and their horrific toll.
The Rev. Claude Alexander of the Park Church in Charlotte, N.C., noted that the Second Amendment was written at a time when the common American firearm was the musket.
\"The founding fathers could never have imagined what the right to bear arms would become,\" he said. \"It was trying to hit one person; it was not one on 50.\"
Photograph
Victims of Last Year's Shooting in Charleston Were Mourned During a Service That Was Held at the Td Arena There On Friday, the First Anniversary of the Attack. (A10); Gov. Nikki R. Haley of South Carolina Called for Unity at the Memorial but Did Not Mention Guns, As Others Did. (Photographs by Stephen B. Morton for the New York Times ) (A16)
Word count: 1250
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 18, 2016"
