"CORRECTION APPENDED. In classical music, birthday celebrations and other anniversary observances sometimes seem strained, even ludicrous, marketing ploys. It is hard to argue with recognitions of round numbers in, say, multiples of 50. But something like Carnegie Hall's 125th anniversary, which came in May? Borderline. And how does a 15th anniversary stack up against a 10th?
New York, as a whole, seems keenly attuned to the 15th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks on Sunday, yet classical music is scarcely taking notice. The contrast is all the more remarkable because the 10th-anniversary commemorations in 2011 were so memorable.
Trinity Wall Street, in particular, positioned itself then as a major moral force in Lower Manhattan, with hourly concerts during the day at the home church and its satellite, the historic St. Paul's Chapel. Choristers, instrumentalists and audiences alike repeatedly shuttled up and down Lower Broadway. And all those different versions of Maurice Duruflé's glorious, haunting hymn setting, \"Ubi Caritas,\" which served as an anthem throughout the day!
This Sunday at 2 p.m., the observance will be far simpler: A brass octet composed of members of Novus NY will perform a memorial program in the St. Paul's churchyard. Then listeners so inclined can troop down to Trinity Church for a brief compline (end of day) service.
Julian Wachner, Trinity Wall Street's director of music and the arts, confessed to mixed feelings about the modesty of this year's commemorations. \"But so much has changed since 2011,\" he said. He singled out the completion of the nearby National September 11 Memorial and Museum.
\"And a closed chapel on top of things,\" Mr. Wachner added. St. Paul's Chapel, which long sat in the shadow of the World Trade Center but somehow survived the attacks to serve as a refuge for emergency medical workers, is undergoing a major renovation to prepare for its 250th-anniversary celebration (yes, a big one) on Oct. 30. It is currently closed to the public, but the extensive musical activities there in recent years will resume when it reopens as a year-round standing memorial.
\"If you visit the museum, you will want to retire either to a bar or to a church,\" he said wryly, and St. Paul's should serve the purpose nicely.
On Sunday morning, firefighters from New York and elsewhere will march from ground zero to the Co-Cathedral of St. Joseph in Brooklyn for a noon Mass featuring a performance of Mozart's Requiem, presented by the Foundation for the Revival of Classical Culture. The performers -- members of the Schiller Institute NYC Community Chorus, vocal soloists and a sizable orchestra -- will already have done the Requiem in concert in the Bronx (Friday, at Lehman College) and Manhattan (Saturday evening, at St. Bartholomew's Church in Midtown), and will repeat it in Morristown, N.J., at the Presbyterian Church on Monday evening.
Bargemusic, the splendid floating concert hall moored in Brooklyn near the Brooklyn Bridge, used to offer a wonderful view of the World Trade Center, along with the rest of Lower Manhattan, through its picture windows. It has presented a memorial concert every year on Sept. 11 and will do so again on Sunday afternoon.
\"I can't imagine not doing the concert,\" said Mark Peskanov, Bargemusic's artistic and executive director. \"It all happened so close by, and we felt such a part of it. Horrible as it was, it brought people together, at least for a time. We try to capture a little of that feeling once a year.\"
The free 4 o'clock concert on Sunday is scheduled to run an hour, but listeners may want to linger in the area to see the \"Tribute in Light,\" the towering blue light installation near ground zero, activated at 6 p.m.
A couple of other concerts more or less related to Sept. 11 are scheduled, but they mostly conflict with these, the programs most likely to live in memory.
Correction: September 13, 2016, Tuesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Saturday about plans for classical music concerts marking the 15th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks misidentified the performers in a brass octet that played Sunday in the St. Paul's churchyard in Lower Manhattan. They were from the Novus NY orchestra, not West Point. The article also misstated the time of the performance; it was 2 p.m., not 7 p.m.
Photograph
Mark Peskanov, Left, and Steven Beck, at a Sept. 11 Memorial Concert in 2013 at Bargemusic, Which has Presented a Concert Every Year to Mark the Anniversary and Will Do so On Sunday. (Photograph by Richard Termine for the New York Times)
Word count: 787
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 10, 2016"
