"GENEVA -- Nearly 200 people who fled Boko Haram attacks have died of malnutrition and sickness in a single camp in northeastern Nigeria in the past month, the medical charity Doctors Without Borders said on Thursday, describing a \"catastrophic humanitarian emergency.\"
In the camp, which sits on the outskirts of the largely ruined Nigerian city of Bama, the charity said that the local authorities reported five to six people dying every day.
\"We have been told that people, including children there, have starved to death,\" Ghada Hatim, the group's head of mission in Nigeria, said in a statement.
Years of devastating attacks by Boko Haram have displaced more than two million people in Nigeria and surrounding countries. The Nigerian city of Maiduguri has more than doubled in size as people flee villages for the town, which is now swarming with soldiers and local vigilantes bent on keeping out Boko Haram.
In nearby Niger, tens of thousands of people who had already fled Boko Haram are again on the run after militants stepped up their activities near the Nigerian border. Fighters attacked a military post this month, killing 32 soldiers and injuring more than 60 people.
In Nigeria, many of the displaced people are housed in government-run camps. But thousands of others are taking refuge in informal camps that have overtaken college campuses or hospital grounds. Many other displaced people have moved into villages, sometimes with 20 or more people living in a single small grass hut.
Sanitation and food problems abound in these areas, and many residents have complained that thieves are stealing food distributed by aid workers, re-bagging it and selling it in the markets.
In the camp outside Bama, the authorities reported that at least 188 people had died since May 23, said Christopher Nambula, a coordinator for Doctors Without Borders. Most of the deaths were attributed to malnutrition, diarrhea, respiratory disease and other ailments. About 24,000 people live in the camp, including 15,000 children.
The United Nations believes that there are about 244,000 children under 5 suffering from severe acute malnutrition in Borno State, where the camp is located, Doune Porter, spokeswoman for Unicef, said by telephone. If children in this condition do not receive treatment, one in five of them will probably die. \"It's urgent that we are able to reach more children,\" she added.
The city of Bama was captured by Boko Haram in September 2014. Several months later, the Nigerian military retook the town but elements of Boko Haram have returned in surrounding areas, posing a threat that has severely hampered aid deliveries.
United Nations agencies had been able to deliver some food and nutritional supplies, Dr. Nambula said. But Doctors Without Borders said its team had screened about 800 children in a visit to the Bama camp and found that nearly one-fifth of them suffered from severe malnutrition, a condition that can lead to death if untreated.
\"Some things are happening there, but we think more can be done,\" Dr. Nambula said. \"The question is how.\"
As the Nigerian military's offensive against Boko Haram lurched forward, soldiers were able to clear the area last week. Aid workers who rode with soldiers to reach the area reported that the military, afraid of being ambushed, fired several rounds along the way.
What they found at the camp shocked humanitarian workers, who described a grim scene of numerous people suffering from disease and lack of food.
One aid worker who visited the camp briefly last week tried to match lactating mothers whose infants had died, from disease or otherwise, with starving infants whose mothers had died in childbirth. The worker came across one woman whose sister had died in childbirth and was trying to feed her sister's baby, despite not being able to produce milk. Other new mothers appeared skinny and malnourished.
Kashim Shettima, the governor of Borno State, also visited last week and described the scene there as \"pathetic.\"
\"It's an unfolding human tragedy,\" he said, describing the sick children he saw.
Doctors Without Borders said its team had counted 1,233 graves dug in the past year in a cemetery located near the camp, and that 480 of the graves were for children.
Mr. Shettima said hundreds of people were being evacuated to Maiduguri, the nearest big town. \"So far so good,\" he said.
Doctors Without Borders said it had screened more than 460 children among 1,100 people evacuated to Maiduguri from three villages near Bama between June 13 and 15. Two-thirds of the children were emaciated, the charity said, and 78 were so acutely malnourished that they had to be hospitalized.
AuthorAffiliation
NICK CUMMING-BRUCE and DIONNE SEARCEY Nick Cumming-Bruce reported from Geneva, and Dionne Searcey from Dakar, Senegal.
Photograph
A Malnourished Child in Nigeria. The United Nations Says Thousands of Children Could Die. (Photograph by Sunday Alamba/Associated Press)
Word count: 834
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 24, 2016"
