"The 9/11 hijackers had no trouble getting one crucial tool that helped them carry out their murderous plot the driver's licenses and state IDs that allowed them to easily board four jetliners.
The 19 terrorists had been issued 16 state driver's licenses and 14 state ID cards, including one obtained with paperwork bought from an undocumented immigrant in a convenience store parking lot in Virginia for $100.
By now, you'd think the nation would have filled this dangerous security gap.
But 14 years after the attack, more than half the states have failed to comply with the 2005 Real ID law that was supposed to make driver's licenses more tamper-proof and tougher to obtain fraudulently. Not only could such changes help prevent attacks, more secure licenses could stop underage drinkers from using fake ID and criminals from obtaining licenses for identity theft schemes.
The federal government has been more than patient with the laggard states. But the Homeland Security Department is expected to announce that it will bring down the hammer on all non-compliant states in early 2018. At that point, if your state doesn't follow the rules, you won't be able to use your driver's license or state ID card to get on a plane. You'll need an alternative ID, such as a passport or a U.S. military ID.
Technically, the government can't force states to comply with Real ID issuing driver's licenses is purely a state matter. But federal authority at airports and government buildings gives the feds significant leverage, and it's about time they used it.
The strongest argument for Real ID is pretty simple: Driver's licenses are already accepted as the nation's most credible and commonly used form of ID. As long as that's the case, they need to be trustworthy. Without improvements, they simply aren't. It is just too easy to fool state motor vehicle offices. In 2003, for example, fewer than half the states bothered to verify Social Security numbers, even while accepting them as proof of identity. Today, under the influence of Real ID, every state verifies with a federal database, and security is better for it.
The insistence by some states that they can't comply due to lack of time or money looks ridiculous when you realize that more than 20 have managed to adopt the standards, including 13 that did so by 2012. And many have success stories to tell. For instance, when Indiana checked its 6 million drivers against a Social Security database, it found 19,000 licenses that didn't match and invalidated them. When it went beyond the law's requirements to use \"facial recognition\" technology to make photos secure, it caught one man who had 149 licenses under different names but with the same photo.
Since 2010, New York has used facial recognition to find and arrest 800 people for having multiple licenses.
The most valid concern raised by opponents is a fear that privacy will be compromised when information on licenses is in a form that's easily shared. In reality, driver's license information currently remains with each individual state. The Real ID law doesn't authorize a national database. Nor is one in the works.
The good news is that while 27 states haven't fully complied with the Real ID requirements, the vast majority of them have moved a good distance in the right direction. Just five Illinois, Minnesota, Missouri, New Mexico and Washington have failed to pass enabling measures or gone so far as to pass laws prohibiting the adoption of Real ID standards.
A security system is only as good as its weakest link. To make this work, all states need to comply. But 14 years after 9/11, it seems compliance will come only when the feds finally show they're serious about cracking down.
Word count: 648
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
