"Airstrikes by the U.S.-led coalition in Iraq and Syria have killed more than 6,400 Islamic State fighters in the past three months, and the militant group is showing the effect of the losses, according to coalition military statistics.
Casualty counts have not been a reliable measure of success against the Islamic State in the past because it replaced fallen fighters with new recruits. But as offensives by Iraqi troops reclaim territory from the radical group, the Islamic State loses its ability to conscript fighters from areas it controlled, which had been the major source of new troops.
U.S. commanders said the combination of airstrikes and Iraqi ground offensives weakened the terror group in Iraq and Syria and hurt its morale.
\"We are noticing they are not quite the same skill level that they once were,\" Lt. Gen. Sean MacFarland, the top coalition commander, said in an interview. \"Maybe they're having trouble replacing quality with quality.\"
Defections appear to be increasing, and the group's ability to mount offensives has waned, he said. \"We take that as a positive indicator that we're starting to hit them where it hurts,\" he said.
The casualty statistics suggest that the air campaign has become more lethal as U.S.-backed Iraqi ground forces have grown more aggressive, and coordination with coalition teams conducting the airstrikes has improved.
The statistics show that the airstrikes have killed nearly 500 fighters a week on average over the past three months. More than 25,000 fighters have been killed by coalition airstrikes since the bombing campaign began nearly 18 months ago, soon after the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS, seized large portions of Iraq.
The U.S. military estimates that the extremist group has 20,000 to 30,000 fighters in Iraq and Syria but acknowledges the numbers are rough.
Ground operations have forced militants into the open as they try to defend their positions, making them vulnerable to air attack. \"They're flushing them out,\" MacFarland said.
Credit: Jim Michaels, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo European PressPhoto Agency
Word count: 363
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
