"Dahir Adan, the man accused of stabbing 10 people at a Minnesota mall last month, slashed an electronics store employee and later advanced toward an off-duty police officer even after sustaining gunshot wounds, security footage released on Thursday showed.
The release of the videos came as prosecutors cleared the police officer, Jason Falconer, of wrongdoing in the Sept. 17 encounter, and as family members and federal investigators continued to puzzle over whether Mr. Adan had been motivated to act by Islamic extremists.
The authorities said Mr. Adan, 20, a Somali refugee who came to the United States as a child, mentioned Allah during the attack at a mall in St. Cloud and asked several victims if they were Muslim before stabbing them. St. Cloud is about 60 miles northwest of Minneapolis.
All of the stabbing victims survived. The gunshots from Officer Falconer, a part-time police officer in a nearby town who happened to be shopping at a Bath & Body Works store, killed Mr. Adan.
The Islamic State, known as ISIS or ISIL, claimed responsibility for the attack, but even after police searched Mr. Adan's computers and other property, it remained unclear whether he had ties to any terrorist groups.
\"The totality of Dahir Adan's behavior and the actions suggest he may have been radicalized, either with the influence of others or on his own,\" said Richard T. Thornton, the special agent in charge of the F.B.I. office in Minneapolis.
Mr. Thornton said that Mr. Adan had recently grown more interested in Islam, began reading the Quran and discussed religion with some relatives. In the months before the attack, Mr. Thornton said he had also \"lost a significant amount of weight\" and gone from being \"an excellent student with a high G.P.A. to flunking out of college.\"
Mr. Thornton also said that investigators had heard that Mr. Adan lost interest in video games and basketball and had withdrawn socially, though friends interviewed in the days after the attack said they noticed no significant changes in Mr. Adan's mind-set or routine.
As days passed with few details about the attack, some in St. Cloud's large Somali community expressed doubts about whether the attack was motivated by religion and whether Mr. Adan even went to the mall intending to commit violence.
But on Thursday, Mr. Thornton outlined a detailed timeline and said the evidence suggested a premeditated attack. On the night of the stabbings, he said, Mr. Adan texted his boss saying he could not work, left home without changing out of his security guard's uniform, struck a bicyclist with his car and continued to the mall.
Within about a minute of Mr. Adan's arrival at the mall, the first of about 95 calls from onlookers to 911 was received. Mr. Adan, said to be carrying two long-bladed steak knifes matching cutlery from his parents' apartment, moved quickly through much of the mall, swinging at one worker in an electronics store and then trying to enter a candy shop before a worker closed the steel gate.
According to the authorities, Mr. Adan soon encountered Officer Falconer, asked him if he was Muslim and ran into a Macy's store without attacking. Prosecutors said Officer Falconer pursued Mr. Adan after seeing Mr. Adan's weapons. Officer Falconer opened fire after Mr. Adan refused several commands to drop the knives. But despite being wounded, Mr. Adan moved toward Officer Falconer again, prompting more gunfire.
Abdulwahid Osman, a lawyer for the Adan family, said Thursday that Mr. Adan's parents \"cannot reconcile their loving son with what's being presented at this point,\" and had not noticed changes in his behavior. Mr. Osman said the assailant's relatives met with the authorities before Thursday's news conference.
\"They continue to mourn and grieve for their son,\" said Mr. Osman, who added that the family also felt \"profound sympathy\" for the victims. \"But nothing that was presented today answers the question of why, why this happened.\"
Word count: 665
Copyright New York Times Company Oct 7, 2016"
