"ANKARA, Turkey -- A motorcycle bomb exploded near a police station in Istanbul on Thursday, wounding at least 10 people, Turkish officials said.
The attack occurred in the Yenibosna district, close to Istanbul's main international airport, the governor of the city, Vasip Sahin, said in televised remarks. He said none of the wounded were in critical condition.
Images broadcast on Turkish television showed wrecked cars and shattered glass from building and car windows in the street outside the police station, which local media reports said was the most likely target of the attack.
Witnesses told CNN Turk that they saw a man in a black jacket with a red hood drive the motorcycle up to the police station, abandon it and run away just before the bomb went off.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the bombing.
Turkey has been hit by a string of terrorist attacks this year. The government has said that Islamic State militants were to blame for some of them and that others were the work of Kurdish insurgents.
A three-decade conflict between the Kurds and Turkey flared up again in July 2015 after a fragile peace process broke down. Since then, Kurdish militant groups have claimed responsibility for several attacks on Turkish security forces that were similar to the motorcycle bombing on Thursday.
The Turkish military has stepped up its operations against Kurdish militants in the country's volatile southeast area over the last year. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey has vowed to root out all terrorist groups in the country.
The last major attack in Istanbul was in June, when Islamic State militants stormed the Ataturk airport with gunfire and three suicide bombings. At least 45 people were killed.
Turkey is also reeling from the violence of a failed military coup in July, which left at least 270 people dead. Since then, thousands of military, police and security personnel, teachers and other public employees have been purged over suspicion of involvement in the coup or sympathy for its aims.
AuthorAffiliation
CEYLAN YEGINSU Follow Ceylan Yeginsu on Twitter @CeylanWrites .
Photograph
Investigators at the Scene of Thursday's Bombing, Which Was Close to the Main Istanbul Airport. (Photograph by Emrah Gurel/Associated Press)
Word count: 398
Copyright New York Times Company Oct 7, 2016"
