"The Justice Department asserted Thursday that Apple has sought to advance \"false\" arguments that threaten privacy breaches on a massive scale in the tech giant's opposition to a court order requiring it to help the FBI gain access to the iPhone used by San Bernardino terrorist Syed Rizwan Farook.
\"The court's order is modest,\" Justice lawyers argued in the latest defense of a California federal magistrate decision. \"It applies to a single iPhone, and it allows Apple to decide the least burdensome means of complying \"
The Justice filing said Apple's opposition is based on arguments that are \"corrosive of the very institutions that are best able to safeguard our liberty and our rights. Here, Apple deliberately raised technological barriers that now stand between a lawful warrant and iPhone containing evidence related to the terrorist mass murder of 14 Americans. Apple can be compelled to give aid. That is no lawless tyranny. Rather, it is ordered liberty vindicating the rule of law.\"
Citing Apple's estimates, the government said the assistance could take as little as two weeks and involve as few as six of the company's 100,000 employees working on the phone recovered shortly after the December mass shooting carried out by Farook and his wife, Tashfeen Malik.
In opposing the court order, Apple has argued that \"no court has ever granted the government power to force companies like Apple to weaken its security systems.\" The action, the company said, would carry the added financial impact of potentially harming the company's reputation.
\"This cheap shot brief surprises us,\" Apple general counsel Bruce Sewell said in a conference call with reporters late Thursday. \"The tone of the brief reads like an indictment.\"
But Justice lawyers contended the company had sought to \"alarm\" the court with claims that the government was pushing to create a \"back door\" into the private communications of millions of customers.
\"This is a diversion,\" the new court papers stated. \"Apple desperately wants -- desperately needs -- this case not to be about one isolated iPhone. But there is probable cause to believe there is evidence of a terrorist attack on that phone, and our legal system give this court the authority to see that it can be searched pursuant to a lawful warrant. And under the compelling circumstances here, the court should exercise that authority, even if Apple would rather its products be warrant proof.\"
A hearing is set for March 22.
Credit: Kevin Johnson, and Jon Swartz, USA TODAY
Word count: 432
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
