"TRIPOLI, Libya -- A suicide bomber attacked a training camp for Coast Guard cadets early on Thursday, killing at least 65 people in one of the deadliest bombings in Libya in recent memory, according to security officials.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the bombing, in the western coastal town of Zlitan. The town is a few hours drive from Surt, the stronghold of the Islamic State affiliate in Libya, which has carried out similar attacks.
Capt. Adel Erhoma, a security officer in the town who visited the camp after the explosion, said it had occurred early on Thursday as cadets gathered. The attackers drove a water truck filled with explosives through the camp's gates before detonating the explosives in the camp's yard, which was packed with cadets, Captain Erhoma said.
\"There is nothing left from the truck but metal shrapnel,\" he said, adding that hospitals were overwhelmed because more than 150 people had been wounded.
Counterterrorism officials have become increasingly alarmed about the Islamic State affiliate in Libya, saying its headquarters in Surt have swelled with foreign fighters, including veterans of the wars in Iraq and Syria. The group has faced little real opposition in Libya, benefiting from feuds between its rival militias and years of political chaos in the country since the fall of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in 2011.
Over the last few days, the affiliate's fighters have launched their most ambitious offensive yet to capture oil towns east of Surt, also along the coast.
That offensive began on Monday as Islamic State fighters attacked the Sidra oil port, and later repelled by guards there. Over the last two days, repeated attempts by the militants to capture the oil port, as well as the nearby oil town of Ras Lanuf, have left at least seven tanks full of crude oil on fire.
On Thursday, a suicide bomber attacked a checkpoint manned by oil facilities guards in Ras Lanuf, killing at least seven people, including a civilian bystander, according to witnesses.
Credit: SULIMAN ALI ZWAY and KAREEM FAHIM; Suliman Ali Zway reported from Tripoli, and Kareem Fahim from Cairo.
Word count: 363
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 8, 2016"
