"a safe space devastated
Just before 2:02 a.m. Sunday, hundreds were gathered at the Pulse nightclub to celebrate Latin night.
In the next three hours, the club would become the location of the deadliest shooting attack in American history.
Omar Mateen, who pledged his allegiance to the Islamic State, shot and killed 49 people and wounded dozens more before he was killed by law enforcement.
Shooter had been seen at the club before
Several regulars at the nightclub told the Orlando Sentinel that they had seen Omar Mateen there before.
One of them, Kevin West, said Mateen messaged him on and off for a year before the shooting, using the gay chat and dating app Jack'd. West said he was dropping off a friend at the club around 1 a.m. Sunday when he noticed Mateen, whom he knew by sight, crossing the street wearing a dark cap and carrying a cellphone.
\"He walked directly past me. I said, 'Hey,' and he turned and said, 'Hey,'\" and nodded his head, West said. \"I could tell by the eyes.\"
Another patron, Ty Smith said he saw Mateen at the club at least a dozen times.
\"Sometimes he would go over in the corner and sit and drink by himself, and other times he would get so drunk he was loud and belligerent,\" Smith said. \"We didn't really talk to him a lot, but I remember him saying things about his dad at times.\"
West said that as soon as he saw released photos of Mateen after the shooting, he went straight to police and turned over his phone and Jack'd log-in information to the FBI.
Current law couldn't stop gun sales to shooter, experts say
There isn't anything in state or U.S. law that would have prevented the Mateen from legally buying the weapons that authorities said he bought days before he set out to attack the nightclub, legal experts say.
Federal authorities say Mateen was armed with a assault weapon and a Glock handgun that he purchased from a Florida gun store on consecutive days about a week before the rampage. A handgun that authorities believe Mateen may have used in his job as a security guard was also found by law enforcement officials in his car, but was not used in the mass shooting.
Mateen had twice previously been on the FBI's radar on suspicions of terrorist activity, but was not on the FBI's large terror watch list database at the time of Sunday's attack.
Despite his past brushes with the FBI, the law allowed for Mateen, who worked as an armed security guard, to legally purchase weapons.
Membership or suspicion of membership in a terrorist organization does not prohibit a person from possessing firearms or explosives under current federal law, but the FBI is notified when a firearm or explosives background check involves an individual on the terrorist watchlist, according to the Government Accountability Office. Suspected terrorists purchased more than 2,000 weapons between 2004 and 2014, according to the GAO.
Obama to visit
The White House said President Obama would travel to Orlando on Thursday to pay respects to the victims \"and to stand in solidarity with the community.\"
USA TODAY editors
Credit: USA TODAY editors
Word count: 567
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
