"Police fired water cannons to disperse hundreds of right-wing protesters who trampled a makeshift memorial to terrorist victims when chaos broke out Sunday at a Rally Against Fear.
Belgian security forces also conducted raids in three cities Sunday and took four people into custody as part of a crackdown on suspected terrorists.
The clashes and ongoing investigation after Tuesday's suicide bombings that killed 31 people and wounded hundreds make some residents worry that Brussels could turn into a city of fear.
Authorities had canceled the planned march, citing a police force already strained after Tuesday's terrorist attacks in Brussels that left at least 31 people dead and hundreds wounded. But several hundred people rallied anyway, including many dressed in black, some covering their faces with balaclavas and carrying an anti-Islamic State banner.
Police struggled to separate the rioters from families quietly paying respects to the victims.
Brussels Mayor Yvan Mayeur expressed outrage that \"this kind of scum\" had added to the nation's pain instead of aiding healing, according to Belgian broadcaster VTM.
Meriem Sayah, 24, who was upset the original march was canceled and came to Place de la Bourse anyway to quietly honor the victims, reflected the uneasiness among some residents. \"We are afraid to go into the metro, on the trains -- we are afraid now to live our lives normally,\" said Sayah. \"We need to speak out (against fear), we need to shout -- because we must be heard.\"
Life was slowly returning to normal, said Brussels resident Charlotte van de Water, 32, who plans to go to an Easter Monday brunch with friends and co-workers.
\"It's that moment now when you again start walking the streets when you again start to live like you used to,\" she said. \"I don't want to think every time I see someone with a backpack that he is carrying a bomb.\"
Some injured in Tuesday's attacks said they were determined not to let terrorists dictate how they live.
Max Beamish, 35, was on the subway car behind the one that blew up. He suffered burns and cuts but said he plans to use metro again. \"I say it with a certain defiance. I strongly feel it is important to live our lives without fear,\" he said.
Still, fear is rampant in Molenbeek, a neighborhood of mostly Belgian Muslims where police raids have taken place since it came to light that some people responsible for the Paris terrorist attacks in November lived here.
\"Molenbeek was bad before, now it is world famous -- labeled as the Islamic State's recruiting grounds,\" said taxi driver Zakariya Afallah, 21. \"If you live in Molenbeek you are labeled, too. This is something that doesn't get erased.\"
Afallah said he was stopped by police and checked just after the attacks. \"It's humiliating,\" he said.
Mehdi Abou Walae, 41, a bus driver, said the current situation will hinder residents even more. He wants to leave the neighborhood but said no one outside Molenbeek would rent to a Muslim family even before the attacks.
\"I was born in Belgium. I consider myself Belgian,\" he added. \"Earlier today I took the metro, and I could feel people were looking at me differently. The tension and the distrust are palpable.\"
At Place de la Bourse, Somya Jibet, 44, and her daughter lit candles for the victims. She said she doesn't feel comfortable being a Muslim in Brussels anymore. \"It makes us wonder if our place is still in Belgium,\" she said.
On Sunday, the U.S. State Department said two more American citizens were confirmed dead in last week's attacks in Brussels, bringing the number of Americans killed to four, NBC News reported. The latest victims were not immediately identified.
Bhatti reported from Berlin. Contributing: James Crisp and Linda Thompson in Brussels; John Bacon, USA TODAY, in Arlington, Va.
Credit: Maya Vidon and Jabeen Bhatti, Special for USA TODAY
Word count: 677
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
