"PARIS -- A judge on Friday threw out a criminal case against a French photographer whose graphic image of a man shot by extremists during the November terrorist attacks in Paris drew the ire of the victim's family.
The case was brought by the Paris prosecutor's office.
French criminal law forbids the publication of photographs of survivors of violent crimes, including terrorist acts, without their permission, on the grounds that it could \"seriously infringe\" on their right to human dignity.
In the photograph, the victim, Cédric Gomet, 30, is seen bloodied and wearing only his underwear.
The judge agreed with Maya Vidon-White, the photographer, and Vincent Tolédano, her lawyer. They had argued that it was an inappropriate use of the law, that no crime was committed, and that the law did not apply because Mr. Gomet was dead when the photo was taken.
Ms. Vidon-White, a longtime war photographer who has worked extensively inside and outside of France, said that she was relieved by the decision, but that it had taken a toll.
\"I am confident I can continue doing my job the way I've always done it, which is to portray the reality of things happening in front of me,\" she said after the ruling, which was viewed by some as a victory for press freedom.
\"But I don't feel a total sense of relief,\" she added.
\"Having to battle a grieving family has been worse even than working in conflict zones,\" she said. \"I never wanted to hurt them, I never wanted to do them any harm.\"
The prosecutor's office did not respond to requests for comment.
Mr. Gomet's family could still file a claim against Ms. Vidon-White, who is the sister-in-law of a staff editor for The International New York Times in Paris, in civil court and request monetary damages. They did not indicate whether they would do so.
Ms. Vidon-White's case was further complicated because she was unaware that the photograph was going to be published in VSD, a glossy weekly magazine, which was also a defendant in the case.
France and Europe generally have stricter press laws than the United States does and a broader interpretation of what it means to infringe on individual dignity.
Photograph
Paris Prosecutors Charged Maya Vidon-White After Her Photograph of a Victim in the November Terror Attacks Was Published. (Photograph by Capucine Granier-Deferre for the New York Times)
Word count: 418
Copyright New York Times Company May 21, 2016"
