"WASHINGTON -- President Obama and Hillary Clinton have been in lock step in denouncing Donald J. Trump's response to the mass shooting in Orlando, Fla. Yet their united front against Mrs. Clinton's likely Republican opponent in the presidential election this fall masks differences in how they portray the threat from Islamic terrorism at home and how they would wage the campaign to defeat it abroad.
Mrs. Clinton, who served as secretary of state during Mr. Obama's first term, has advocated a more aggressive military strategy in Syria, including a no-fly zone to protect civilians -- something the president has steadfastly rejected. She has spoken more starkly than he has about the threat posed by Islamic State-inspired terrorism in the United States. And she would overhaul the administration's efforts to counter violent extremism, according to a senior campaign adviser.
\"Whatever we learn about this killer, his motives in the days ahead,\" Mrs. Clinton said Monday, \"we know already the barbarity that we face from radical jihadists is profound.\" Mr. Obama has shunned such charged language, arguing that it sows fear. When the nation has acted out of fear after terrorist attacks, he said on Tuesday, \"we came to regret it.\"
For the most part, Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Obama seemed to echo each other this week in condemning Mr. Trump's call to ban Muslims from entering the United States and in ridiculing his fixation on the label \"radical Islamic terrorism.\"
Still, even as Mrs. Clinton castigated Mr. Trump, she declared that she had no problem using the term \"radical Islamism.\" She said it meant the same thing as \"radical jihadism,\" a phrase she used regularly. Mr. Obama stuck to his refusal to utter those words; he said they played into the hands of the militants by implying that Islam was synonymous with terrorism.
Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Obama are in different places, to be sure: one a second-term president with fixed views on how to deal with terrorism; the other a female Democratic candidate for the White House facing a likely Republican opponent who is determined to exploit fears about terrorism in a campaign suddenly dominated by national security concerns.
But their response to the Orlando attack illustrates the challenge both will face as the general election campaign begins. As Mr. Obama campaigns for her, they will have to figure out how to navigate differences that range across foreign and domestic issues and reflect divergences in both tactics and worldview.
\"They should both stipulate that they're not going to agree on 100 percent of things because no two people do, and if she's president of the United States, she's going to set her own direction,\" said David Axelrod, a former political adviser to Mr. Obama. \"The one thing she's not going to associate herself with is the concept that his policies have failed.\"
During her long battle with Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont for the Democratic nomination, Mrs. Clinton has tried to play down policy differences with Mr. Obama, in part because she needed to keep the president close to appeal to the racially diverse coalition that he assembled in 2008. As she confronts Mr. Trump, the gaps will be harder to ignore.
\"If she's going to be critical of Trump, then she's got to put it in the context of identifying two or three places where she's been successful with Obama,\" said David Winston, a Republican strategist. \"Then the areas where she's similar to or different from him will emerge.\"
Trade is likely to be the most visible dividing line between them. Mr. Obama is pushing hard for Congress to ratify his ambitious Asian trade agreement, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, before he leaves office. As secretary of state, Mrs. Clinton promoted the agreement scores of times. But last fall, facing an unexpectedly robust challenge from Mr. Sanders, she reversed course and came out against it.
On national security, Mrs. Clinton's differences with Mr. Obama go back further and are rooted in more than political calculation. In 2012, while still in the administration, she argued for funneling weapons to moderate rebels in Syria. She said later that the failure to do so had opened a security vacuum in Syria that was filled by the militants of the Islamic State.
In October, Mrs. Clinton announced that she favored a no-fly zone to create \"humanitarian corridors to try to stop the carnage on the ground and from the air.\" She has said little about the proposal in recent months, and there is no sign that it has gained any traction in the administration.
Another area where Mrs. Clinton is likely to diverge from Mr. Obama is in how to counter the propaganda of violent extremism. The Obama administration has focused heavily on communications, an approach that critics say has proved disappointing. A former administration official who is advising the Clinton campaign said Mrs. Clinton would place more emphasis on working with teachers, community leaders, imams and others who have direct contact with those at risk of being radicalized.
She will also put new pressure on the United States' Arab allies, said this adviser, who asked to remain anonymous because he was not authorized to speak for the Clinton campaign. In Monday's speech, she sounded that theme, saying that \"it is long past time for the Saudis, the Qataris and the Kuwaitis and others to stop their citizens from funding extremist organizations.\"
Mr. Obama came under criticism for failing to express adequate fury after the terrorist attacks in Paris that left 130 people dead. White House officials acknowledged later that Mr. Obama had been too modulated, but the president has not wavered from his refusal to use overheated language in discussing terrorism. \"Enough talking about being tough on terrorism,\" he said on Tuesday. \"Actually be tough on terrorism.\"
Mrs. Clinton has consistently used harsher language than Mr. Obama in characterizing the threat from Islamic militants. Americans \"are anxious and fearful, and we have reason to be,\" she said in December, after the shootings in San Bernardino, Calif. At the time, campaign officials said she needed to \"validate\" the fears of Americans.
Mrs. Clinton's advisers are not eager to discuss policy differences between her and the president. But the extreme nature of Mr. Trump's pronouncements makes her disagreements with Mr. Obama look relatively minor.
\"The focus will be on the fork in the road on the path forward with Trump versus the path forward with Clinton,\" said Geoff Garin, a Democratic pollster who is working for Priorities USA Action, a \"super PAC\" supporting Mrs. Clinton. \"The differences they have with each other will pale in comparison to the fundamental differences they share with Donald Trump.\"
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.
Photograph
Hillary Clinton at a Campaign Event in Pittsburgh On Tuesday. She has Advocated a More Aggressive Military Strategy in Syria. (Photograph by Eric Thayer for the New York Times)
Word count: 1181
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 16, 2016"
