"On Sunday, Colombians in and around New York City voted in a referendum on a peace accord between the Colombian government and the country's largest rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known as FARC. The deal was endorsed by President Juan Manuel Santos and had been expected to pass.
Voters rejected it, however, and the \"no\" vote won by a slim margin. Among voters in Manhattan and Queens, \"yes\" and \"no\" supporters turned out with posters and flags. Their responses have been translated and condensed.
Lina Alvarez, 45; No
Immigrated to the United States in 1998
\"We don't want the deal that Santos has made with the narco-terrorist guerrillas. I feel sad to see Colombians blindfolded by the president. He's going to turn over the country to the guerrillas. He already did. The 'yes' voters? They're going to be voting 'yes,' when they're standing in line for toilet paper.\"
Juan Camilo Caicedo, 44; Yes
Immigrated to the United States in 2000
\"Four kidnappings, two murders. My two uncles were doctors who were kidnapped and killed. One was kidnapped to tend to the head of the 22nd Front of the FARC. My two cousins were kidnapped, too; they are my age. But they were released. My father was threatened every year on our farm. My whole family was, really.
\"I'm voting yes, of course. It's the better option, so that my daughter can know a Colombia in peace.\"
Henry Camelo, 40; Yes
Immigrated to the United States in 2001
\"My last job in Colombia was at Citytv. I was part of their investigative unit. We were bringing to light links between members of the government, the military and the paramilitaries. We were investigating a politician who had links to the paramilitaries.
\"We discovered this, we made it public, and the threats started. I got a condolence card. They sent it to my mother's house. It said, 'We're sorry about the death of your son.'
\"One night two motorcycles appeared, and they started shooting. Luckily nothing happened. That's when I came here.\"
\"I'm voting yes. I feel that finally the truth is going to be revealed. There's going to be a truth commission, and the guerrillas are going to say exactly what happened, but it's also going to come out who was involved when there were displacements and massacres. And those who hide behind the 'no' are in the end going to have to answer for it.\"
María Isabel Nieto Jaramillo, 50; Yes
Immigrated to the United States a year and a half ago
\"My brother was kidnapped in 1984; my family dealt with extortion and kidnappings. No murders, just extortion and kidnappings. I'm happy to be living this moment and to have seen the process from up close.
\"Here we've heard many stories from victims. It's part of our work-- the victims come here to process applications for reparations. I heard from one woman whose entire family was assassinated by the FARC -- father, husband, siblings, children. She forgave them. She did it publicly here at an event. There are so many people who were displaced by the conflict here. Meanwhile, social media has become a battleground. What I say is that every person is the sole owner of their pain. We can't judge anyone for their position in favor or in opposition.\"
José, 38; No
Immigrated to the United States in 1994
\"We all want peace in Colombia. But not with impunity. This is total impunity. One of my uncles was kidnapped and tortured by the FARC in 2000. They demanded money from the family and they returned him in a bag, cut up in pieces. So peace? Yes. Total impunity? No. Running the country and making laws? No.\"
Anamaria Roa, 20; Yes
Immigrated to the United States in 1999
\"I had doubts; I read lots of articles and listened to my friends and relatives. I think at the end of the day you have to take a leap of faith.
\"I love Colombia. It's a country full of passion, full of happiness. It's time that it be recognized for that happiness and not just for all the violence.\"
Amy Velez, 56; Yes
Immigrated to the United States 30 years ago
\"We are a country where the state sustained paramilitary groups that made ovens to throw people in so they wouldn't talk. I don't want to get emotional, but imagine a country where people decapitated bodies with wire and then played soccer with the people's heads in the public plaza. When we went to the massacre of Alta Naya the people said, 'Señora, in the river there wasn't water flowing, there was blood.'
\"If you tell me there's the possibility that we can participate politically without them killing us, of course I'm going to say yes.\"
Adriana Marin, 49; No
Immigrated to the United States 17 Years Ago
\"My uncle gave lodging to the military and the guerrillas told him the next time you do that, we'll kill you. He and his wife went running. They left their house, the land he had cultivated his entire life. For me, it hurts because I lived it. The fear, the constant hiding.
\"I got tired of living that way. They must pay somehow. It's not fair that they want to give them positions in the government. I want peace, but I don't believe that this will be real.\"
John Sepúlveda, 63; Yes
Immigrated to the United States in 2000
\"Yesterday I called one of my relatives, he was at one of the farms in the Córdoba region. It was hit by the guerrillas, then by the paramilitaries. We were hit from right and left. He said, 'You don't know how happy I feel again in my farm, checking my cattle. Call all your friends and say they have to vote for peace in Colombia.' I cried.
\"He said, 'I don't want anyone to go through this thing. I didn't think I would ever come back.\"'
Noilys Arrieta, 56; Yes
Immigrated to the United States three years ago
\"My brother in-law died. He was a professor when they assassinated him, the paramilitaries. No one knows why. Imagine, the father of a family leaving behind his wife and young kids.
\"Before that, another professor had disappeared. He was tortured, his fingers cut off. It was horrendous.
\"We have to find peace. If God wills it.\"
Photograph
(Photographs by Jonah Markowitz for the New York Times; Bryan Anselm for the New York Times)
Word count: 1100
Copyright New York Times Company Oct 3, 2016"
