"PHOENIX -- An Arizona man was found guilty on Thursday of conspiring to support Islamic terrorists by helping to plan an attack at an exhibit of anti-Islam cartoons in Texas.
A jury of four men and eight women returned the verdict against the man, Abdul Malik Abdul Kareem, on their third day of deliberations in Federal District Court here, in what the authorities described as the country's first jury trial involving a violent act committed in the name of the Islamic State.
\"People who are plotting to harm America and Americans are no longer a world away,\" Justin Tolomeo, acting special agent in charge for the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Phoenix, said in a statement.
Mr. Kareem, a convert to Islam, had been accused of transporting guns across state lines, arming the attackers and training them to use the weapons, conspiring to support Islamic extremists and lying to federal agents. Because he served time in prison on a drunken-driving conviction, he was also charged with being a felon in possession of a firearm.
On May 3, Elton Simpson, 30, and Nadir Soofi, 34, drove to Garland, Tex., and opened fire outside the Curtis Culwell Center as it hosted an exhibit of cartoons lampooning the Prophet Muhammad. The two men injured a security guard before dying in a shootout.
Mr. Kareem, 44, did not accompany the gunmen, but he armed, trained and encouraged them.
He hunched forward and stared ahead as Judge Susan R. Bolton silently reviewed the verdict. As soon as he heard \"guilty\" for the first time, he hung his head, shaking it slightly each of the four times the word was uttered.
His lawyer, Daniel D. Maynard, had maintained that the federal government was out to get Mr. Kareem, establishing his role in the attack through his connection to Mr. Simpson and Mr. Soofi, as well as his poor choices. Essentially, Mr. Maynard argued, the case was about misplaced revenge.
Three hours before the attack, the F.B.I. attached a photograph of Mr. Simpson to a bulletin it sent to the police in Garland, telling them that he was \"interested in the event,\" the agency's director, James Comey, told reporters last year. The F.B.I. did not know, however, that Mr. Simpson and Mr. Soofi were on their way.
During the trial, prosecutors displayed a message Mr. Simpson wrote on Twitter bemoaning the cartoon contest: \"When will they ever learn.\"
It was one of several social media posts written by the attackers and used by prosecutors to establish Mr. Kareem's intentions.
According to court documents, though, Mr. Kareem did not have a Twitter account, and his name never appeared in any of the messages.
The government \"messed up,\" Mr. Maynard told jurors during his closing argument. The case against his client, he added, was \"about the government deciding they need to find somebody else.\"
Mr. Maynard declined to comment as he walked out of the court Thursday, carrying the button-down shirts Mr. Kareem had worn during the trial.
Judge Bolton scheduled the sentencing for June 27.
Prosecutors used neighbors, friends and former roommates to tie Mr. Kareem, Mr. Soofi and Mr. Simpson. Mr. Kareem met them in 2011 at Mr. Soofi's pizzeria. They prayed together and frequented the same mosque, and, for several months last year, Mr. Simpson lived in Mr. Kareem's home.
From the stand, Mr. Kareem said he asked Mr. Simpson to leave after catching him watching Al Qaeda videos on the computer.
There were, however, troubling signs. A 13-year-old neighbor of Mr. Kareem's testified that Mr. Kareem laughed as images of a Jordanian pilot burning inside a cage flashed on the television screen. Another neighbor, 15, recalled Mr. Kareem's saying that he wanted to blow himself up inside a mall.
A former roommate of Mr. Kareem's, Stefan Verdugo, who is in jail on charges of forcing his girlfriend into prostitution, said Mr. Kareem asked him where he could obtain enough explosives to blow up the football stadium outside Phoenix hosting the 2015 Super Bowl. The plan fell through, and Mr. Kareem moved on to helping to organize the Garland attack, prosecutors said.
He took Mr. Simpson and Mr. Soofi target-shooting in the desert and bought the guns they used in the attack. During his closing argument, Assistant United States Attorney Joseph E. Koehler said Mr. Kareem was \"the motivator, he was the bankroller, he was the trainer and an intended participant.\"
The three-week trial included testimony from terrorism experts, who spent hours dissecting the recruitment methods used by extremist groups such as the Islamic State, which prosecutors said inspired or ordered the attack. Its role, if any, remains unknown.
Photograph
Abdul Malik Abdul Kareem
Word count: 800
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 18, 2016"
