"Three young men of Somali descent from the Minneapolis area were sentenced on Monday to prison terms, ranging from time served to 10 years behind bars, for their parts in a wide-ranging plot to join the terror group Islamic State.
Abdullahi Yusuf, 20, who helped build a case against eight of his friends who plotted to join the group, also known by the acronym ISIL or ISIS, will get out of prison with time served, but spend 20 years under supervised release for his role in the conspiracy, U.S. District Judge Michael Davis ruled.
Yusuf, who was arrested in 2014 and pleaded guilty to his part in the conspiracy, played a key role in helping federal prosecutors unravel an ISIL plot to recruit at least a dozen young people from Minnesota's large Somali community to join the extremist group's fight in Syria and Iraq.
Yusuf, the first to plead guilty, took part in an experimental jihadi rehabilitation program and was expected to get the lightest sentence.
Davis also ordered Yusuf to spend the next year in a Minneapolis halfway house.
U.S. Attorney Andrew Luger noted Yusuf's cooperation.
\"The hard work of rehabilitating those who seek to engage in ideological violence must continue,\" Luger said.
\"Judge Davis recognized that fact today by a sentence for Abdullahi Yusuf that allows him to continue his rehabilitation. The United States thanks Mr. Yusuf for his cooperation.\"
A second co-conspirator, Zacharia Abdurahman, 21, was sentenced to 10 years in prison, and a third man, Abdiriza Warsame, was sentenced Monday to 30 months in prison, followed by 20 years of supervised release.
Warsame, 21, has been in custody for nearly a year.
Six others who pleaded guilty or were convicted in the plot are scheduled to be sentenced Tuesday and Wednesday.
Warsame, who also cooperated with prosecutors, told the judge that he's \"done some horrible things,\" but that he now wants to work against radical extremism.
\"I know what it's like to be manipulated and tricked,\" Warsame said, according to KARE-TV.
Prosecutors are seeking the toughest sentences for three members of the plot -- Abdirahman Yasin Daud, Mohamed Abdihamid Farah, and Guled Ali Omar -- who were convicted in June by a jury for their part in the conspiracy.
Yusuf and Warsame testified that the group intended to travel to Syria where they all expected to kill on behalf of ISIL.
Prosecutors also used secret recordings made by a paid FBI informant to help make their case. In the recordings, the defendants and others in the conspiracy could be heard talking brashly about ISIL and plotting how to make their way to Syria to join the terror organization.
Two other men that were part of the group, Abdi Nur and Yusuf Jama, traveled successfully to Syria without getting caught. Nur, who is believed to still be in Syria, has been charged in the case; authorities believe Jama was killed in the fighting.
During the trial, an FBI Joint Terrorism Task Force officer testified that a relative of Nur from Minnesota, Mohamad Roble, also had traveled to Syria in October 2014. The FBI informant said some members of the Minneapolis group reached out to Roble in 2014 to seek money, so they could make the trip to Syria to join ISIL.
Yusuf was prevented from getting on a Turkey-bound flight in May 2014 and was charged months later.
Credit: Aamer Madhani, @AamerISmad, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo AP
Word count: 608
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
