"Hillary Clinton has said it. The European Parliament, the U.S. Catholic bishops and Pope Francis have also uttered the important word to describe the Islamic State's systematic elimination of Christians and other religious and ethnic minorities in the Middle East.
It's called genocide.
The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom, the Iraqi and Kurdish governments, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and German Chancellor Angela Merkel have called what is happening by its correct name.
But not so the Obama administration. The president and his representatives refuse to embrace the word and the attendant responsibilities that come with recognizing the campaign of terror in the Middle East.
So it was left to the House to speak out on behalf of the United States. Monday, it passed a resolution co-sponsored by 214 members of Congress -- including 65 Democrats -- to say what the president will not. The resolution declares that the atrocities against Middle Eastern religious and ethnic minorities constitute \"war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.\" It declares that it is the sense of Congress that all governments, including the Unites States, should recognize this reality. The resolution passed unanimously 393 votes to zero. A bipartisan companion bill in the Senate has 10 co-sponsors.
The resolution came in advance of a looming Thursday deadline requiring the secretary of State to \"submit to the appropriate congressional committees an evaluation of the persecution of, including attacks against, Christians and people of other religions in the Middle East by violent Islamic extremists.\"
Why the administration has not invoked the \"g-word\" is a bit of a mystery. Secretary of State John Kerry stated a year and a half ago that \"ISIL's campaign of terror against the innocent, including Yezedi and Christian minorities, and its grotesque and targeted acts of violence bear all the warning signs and hallmarks of genocide.\"
Indeed, a just-released Knights of Columbus report chronicles the murder, kidnappings, sexual slavery and displacement of Christians at the hands of ISIL. Mass graves of Christians have been discovered in Syria. If there is still any question about the religiously motivated actions, the report outlines ISIL propaganda that declares it will \"continue to wage war against the Christians by the permission of Allah.\"
Raphael Lemkin coined the word genocide because he recognized that this was a special kind of evil that needed to be named. He wrote that the \"formulation of genocide as a crime (enshrines) the principle that every national, racial and religious group has a natural right of existence.\"
Is this what the Obama administration believes? If so, now would be the time to let the world know.
Kirsten Powers, a member of the USA TODAY Board of Contributors, is author of The Silencing: How the Left is Killing Free Speech.
Word count: 485
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
