"ORLANDO, Fla. -- After denying the state of Florida's petition for $5 million in emergency funding to cover costs associated with the massacre at a popular gay nightclub, the Obama administration announced Tuesday that it would offer $1 million to help pay for police overtime.
Attorney General Loretta Lynch visited Orlando on Tuesday, nine days after Omar Mateen, who pledged allegiance to the Islamic State, opened fire at the Pulse nightclub. Ms. Lynch met with some of the wounded and relatives of the 49 people killed in the attack, as well as with top law enforcement officials in the region.
Ms. Lynch said the Department of Justice would make $1 million available to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement so local jurisdictions could cover the overtime costs associated with the killings.
\"We will move quickly to make the award as soon as possible,\" she said, adding that the administration was also providing counseling resources for traumatized officers and medics.
\"We are also making federal emergency funds and victim compensation funding available to cover, for example, family travel expense, medical, mental health expenses and other costs related to this tragedy,\" she added.
Her announcement came after Gov. Rick Scott criticized the administration for declining his application for $5 million of Department of Homeland Security emergency funding.
In a letter on Monday, the administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, W. Craig Fugate, told the governor that the request, made the day after the shooting, had been denied because the appeal did not explain how the incident was beyond the capability of the state and local governments. The request also did not demonstrate how federal funds could help protect lives and property, the letter said.
\"An emergency declaration is not appropriate for this incident,\" Mr. Fugate wrote in the letter, which was released by the governor's office.
Records show that FEMA has approved the vast majority of emergency funding requests made after hurricanes and other disasters, but that no state has applied in the wake of a mass shooting.
Mr. Scott called the denial \"incredibly disappointing\" and said the state would appeal.
\"It is unthinkable that President Obama does not define this as an emergency,\" Mr. Scott, a Republican, said in a statement. \"We are committing every state resource possible to help the victims and the community heal, and we expect the same from the federal government.\"
Sheriff Jerry L. Demings of Orange County said he learned about the $1 million at the news conference when Ms. Lynch announced it. His department was still trying to determine how much had been spent, he said.
\"One million dollars?\" he said. \"You know what? It's a start.\"
Sheriff Demings confirmed that Mr. Mateen, a 29-year-old security guard, had visited the nightclub several hours before the 2 a.m. shooting spree. He appeared to have stepped outside for some period of time and returned just before firing on the patrons, he said.
He declined to give any more details. Ms. Lynch also declined to provide any new information on the case.
She said the agency would reveal more information later, including results of firearms testing to determine whether any victims had been killed by police bullets. She also said she would eventually release the audio tape of Mr. Mateen's 911 call.
The administration was criticized Monday for releasing a partial transcript of just one of his calls, which deleted references Mr. Mateen made to the Islamic State and its leader. A few hours later, the Department of Justice released a version without the redactions.
Ms. Lynch's visit to Orlando came as the downtown area surrounding the Pulse nightclub began returning to normalcy.
\"There is no doubt that this was a shattering attack,\" Ms. Lynch said. \"But the message of Orlando goes far beyond one night of unspeakable terror. The message of Orlando that I have seen today -- and what the American people have seen in the wake of this horrific assault -- is a message of determination to remove hatred and intolerance from our midst.\"
Credit: FRANCES ROBLES; Richard Perez-Pena contributed reporting from New York.
Word count: 691
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 22, 2016"
