"On the eve of its scheduled legal showdown in a California court with Apple Inc., the Justice Department's request for a postponement was granted Monday by a federal judge as the FBI tests a new method for unlocking the iPhone of San Bernardino terrorist Syed Farook.
Justice lawyers claimed in court documents filed late Monday that an undisclosed \"outside party\" demonstrated a \"possible method\" to the FBI for unlocking Farook's phone, recovered in the aftermath of the December massacre that left 14 dead.
\"Testing is required to determine whether it is a viable method that will not compromise data on Farook's iPhone,\" Justice lawyers said in the three-page filing. \"If the method is viable, it should eliminate the need for the assistance from Apple Inc.\"
The government, which earlier informed Apple of its request, said it would file a status report with the court by April 5. \"Our top priority has always been gaining access into the phone used by the terrorist in San Bernardino,\" Justice spokeswoman Melanie Newman said Monday. \"With this goal in mind, the FBI has continued in its efforts to gain access to the phone without Apple's assistance.\"
Federal authorities declined to identify the outside party working with the FBI. But a federal law enforcement official said authorities have been in discussions with the outside source for a period of days before the government developed enough confidence to seek a cancellation of Tuesday's hearing. The official, who is not authorized to comment publicly, said the outside party approached the FBI with a potential solution.
The request by the government came as the tech giant Monday was again defending its decision to oppose last month's federal court order, directing the company to help investigators in their attempt to gain access to the phone. \"We have a responsibility to help (our customers) protect your data and protect your privacy,\" Apple CEO Tim Cook said.
Credit: Kevin Johnson, USA TODAY
Word count: 337
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
