"PARIS -- The terror attacks here last year depressed attendance at some of the city's marquee museums, with the number of visitors at the Louvre down by almost 7 percent from the previous year to 8.7 million visits, officials said Tuesday.
Across the Seine the Musée d'Orsay also released figures for 2015, which showed attendance falling by 1 percent, to 3.4 million, after mostly steady increases over the previous five years. Figures for the Pompidou Center are expected this week.
A major factor was the cancellation -- both after the attacks of Nov. 13 and those of last January -- of thousands of class trips from schools in the city and suburbs, with many municipalities reluctant to allow schools to send children on public transportation to areas where large crowds might gather.
In addition, the city's museums and cultural institutions were closed by executive order the weekend of the November attacks, which happened on a Friday.
\"It's clear since the attacks that there have been hardly any school groups,\" Amélie Hardivillier, a spokeswoman for the Musée d'Orsay, said, noting that on Tuesday she saw a visiting class of young students for the first time since the November attacks.
The Louvre's figures showed that 78 percent of its visitors were from overseas, particularly Americans and Chinese. But the museum noted that the attacks particularly affected attendance by French visitors, with the number of students dropping 26 percent to 510,000 and the total number of French citizens falling 28 percent to 1.85 million.
The effect on the institution's bottom line is difficult to calculate. School groups are admitted free, as are about one in three visitors over all. Foreign visitors generally pay the full fee.
The Musée d'Orsay also manages the Musée de l'Orangerie -- home to Monet's monumental \"Water Lilies\" cycle of paintings -- which saw attendance fall sharply after the November attacks. The number of visitors there dropped almost 40 percent in the week after the attacks, compared with the same period a year earlier.
Total attendance at the Orangerie for 2015 dropped by almost 4 percent, to 770,000, partly because it did not have a special exhibition to cushion it, Ms. Hardivillier said.
There are signs, however, that museumgoers are returning in significant numbers. In the last three days of 2015 attendance at the Musée d'Orsay returned to normal levels -- up to 14,000 daily, officials said. The museum is hoping that an Henri Rousseau exhibition in March will draw more younger visitors, with the painter's depictions of magical gardens, animals and snake charmers.
\"It's been very difficult, but we still managed to end the year with success,\" Ms. Hardivillier said. \"People still need culture because it gives them freedom.\"
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Word count: 479
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 6, 2016"
