"PARIS -- The sold-out concert by Eagles of Death Metal here Tuesday night was at once a tribute to those who died in the November terrorist attacks during a performance by the band and a celebration of those who survived.
Above all, though, it was surprisingly electrifying rock 'n' roll.
That was all the more striking because the last time many in the audience had seen the band was the night of Nov. 13, when three terrorists entered the Bataclan concert hall and gunned down 90 people in the attacks that left 130 dead.
Yet when Eagles of Death Metal opened on Tuesday at the historic Olympia theater in central Paris with their signature song, \"I Only Want You,\" and Jesse Hughes, the lead singer, blew kisses to the crowd, people began clapping, singing along and dancing, with some even trying to climb over the barriers into the pit.
\"This finishes the concert that was at the Bataclan,\" said Frank Auffret, 44, who survived the attacks.
\"It closes the book so that we can turn the page on the dramatic event that we all suffered through and begin other things,\" said Mr. Auffret, who after the shootings became active in Life for Paris, a survivors' group, and is now its treasurer.
The performance became an opportunity for some of those present when the attack occurred to try to exorcise a bit of the darkness of that experience. And perhaps aware of how eager many people were to throw off the sadness, Mr. Hughes did not dwell on what happened. He asked for a moment of silence, and after 10 seconds, the music began.
His patter could have been spoken at any rock concert -- \"How is everybody tonight?\" he asked before using raunchy language to say how glad he was to see everyone.
Still, this was hardly an ordinary rock concert. Mr. Hughes held up a T-shirt emblazoned with the words \"Life for Paris\" and what appeared to be signatures on it -- a reminder of who was in the audience: not just those who had survived the attacks, but their relatives, girlfriends and boyfriends.
The event took place under heavy security that included two body searches as well as inspections of bags before anyone could enter the hall. The police also shut down half of the traffic on the main boulevard that runs in front of the theater, which is near the Paris Opera, by early afternoon.
For many, even getting to the concert, much less entering, was not easy. One man left about 45 minutes into the concert. He was wearing a T-shirt with a picture of a woman, the name Priscilla and the date 13/11/2015.
Yet for others it was a reunion. Some fans were leaning on walking sticks or canes, some on crutches, a reminder of the more than 300 people who were wounded in the attacks.
Some psychologists were seated on the steps that led into the hall, and one man sat quietly crying and talking to one of them.
For some who came it was a deeply private moment. A couple took a selfie and told reporters they had decided not to talk to anybody. Others seemed almost proud to be there.
Audrey Guiny, 24, who was shot in the foot and had to quit her job as a first-aid worker, had mixed emotions about coming, but also deep resolve. \"There is joy, there is fear,\" she said. \"I would have regretted not being here for the band and for those who were killed.\"
\"I knew I was going to come; it was a certainty -- even on crutches,\" she said, gesturing to her foot, which is still healing.
This was not the first time that Eagles of Death Metal had played in Paris since the attacks. The group took part in a show with U2 in early December, playing a Patti Smith song, \"People Have the Power,\" and the next day laid wreaths at the Bataclan.
The band is on a European tour that began last Saturday in Stockholm.
As the Paris concert ended and people streamed out, most seemed glad that they had gone. A woman who gave only her first name, Olia, said she was a 34-year-old publicist from Los Angeles who had been at the Bataclan on Nov. 13. She said she had been hesitant about attending because she had seen Mr. Hughes give interviews and break down in tears.
\"I was afraid it would be a heavy atmosphere,\" she said.
Instead she felt that she might have begun to overcome the trauma of having seen people killed. By being there, she said, \"You're taking control. It was therapeutic for me. I didn't know how it was going to feel, but I stayed.\"
\"I cried during the entire first two songs,\" she added. \"It was cathartic.\"
For Ms. Guiny, the concert was a victory of sorts, so much so that she wanted to overcome one last hurdle and have the band play the song they were playing when the shooting started, so she could dispel the nightmarish association the song had taken on.
\"I was disappointed that they did not play their song 'Kiss the Devil,' \" she said.
\"That would have allowed me to put an end to that damn concert, that concert from hell.\"
Credit: ALISSA J. RUBIN and BENOIT MORENNE; Benoit Morenne contributed reporting.
Photograph
Eagles of Death Metal, Who Were Playing at the Bataclan Concert Hall in Paris When Terrorists Killed 90 People There On Nov. 13, Performed On Tuesday at the Olympia in the French Capital. (Photograph by Joel Saget/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 967
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 17, 2016"
