"A video with a new British-sounding 'frontman' is a reminder that Isis is still in business and that it has not lost the ability to provoke a badly thought-out response
Know your enemy, wrote the strategist Sun Tzu more than 2,500 years ago. The latest Islamic State video is proof, if it is needed, that Isis understands this ancient principle of warfare. It also prompts the thought, not for the first time, that Isis may understand it better than the UK government and military, whose actions against Isis have so often struggled to achieve their long-term aims.
In the latest video a jihadi with a British accent directs the murders of five men who are accused of spying for the UK. The video's release on Sunday was expertly timed to ensure front-page treatment at the end of the holiday season. It achieved that goal with ease. It was designed to shock, frighten and, above all else, provoke a British audience. The murders and the appearance of a British-accented child threatening further deaths will have ensured that it did that too.
The video tells us a number of things, both directly and indirectly. The most immediate message is simply that Isis is still in business, in spite of the recent military assaults against it. David Cameron is entitled to be taken seriously when he claims, as he did on Monday, that the video was \"desperate stuff\" by a jihadi force in retreat. But the evidence for that claim is mixed and the video is a cautionary reminder that UK government claims have been overly optimistic in the past in the fight with jihadi terrorists, and may be so again.
In Iraq, Isis fighters have lost much of the city of Ramadi in recent weeks, but they are still fighting there. Likewise, Isis has been under sustained aerial assault in Syria, losing some significant individual leaders, but the group has lost relatively little territory. Its attempts to consolidate a position in Libya continue. Meanwhile, fear of Isis is still potent in Europe, as the jihadi group is determined it should be and as the nerves surrounding new year's events in Paris, Brussels and Munich confirmed.
A second message is not to overlook the main explicit business of the video. Isis accused the five murdered men in the video of having spied for Britain, and of supplying information to sources in Turkey. Whether true or not, Isis has apparently strengthened its counter-intelligence capabilities, in terms both of IT interception of citizen journalism and of hit squads in southern Turkey. The video suggests Isis is still proactive and effective and that those who inform against it are in as much mortal danger as ever.
News organisations should be careful not to glorify the hostile perpetrators inadvertently
The video is designed both to frighten the fearful -- not least through its use, and abuse, of a very young child -- and beguile the naive. No free society can impose a total blackout on videos of the kind that Isis has again released, least of all under the transformed conditions of the internet era. Yet a sensible free society should not play the terrorists' game unthinkingly either. A free media still needs to observe self control. News organisations are right to censor violent videos on grounds of taste. They should also be careful not to glorify the hostile perpetrators inadvertently. They do not want to hand the jihadis the megaphone they crave, or amplify the one they already have. That mistake was made too often in the coverage of Mohammed Emwazi. By surrendering our airwaves to this latest video, we risk repeating the error and doing the terrorists' job for them.
Credit: Editorial
Word count: 628
(Copyright , Guardian Newspapers Limited, Jan 04, 2016)"
