"MOUNT HERMON, Golan Heights -- Israel's military commanders are rethinking their concept of border security as they watch the reality of what is happening on the other side changing in front of their eyes.
With new terrorism, violence and chaos engulfing the Middle East, it is clearer than ever to them that nonstate actors with sophisticated weapons and technology have replaced the threat from Arab armies, forcing Israel to weigh differently the advantages of preventive strikes against the risks of setting off the next war.
Given its lack of strategic depth, the Israeli military is investing in fences, surveillance and reconnaissance devices.
A top general recently told reporters that Israel must enhance its cross-border intelligence abilities and build on mutual interests and cooperation with Egypt and Jordan.
Security, said the military's chief of operations, Maj. Gen. Nitzan Alon, \"should not start at the borderline.\" With Israel facing multiple threats from all sides, he added, \"we do not have the luxury of focusing just on the Golan Heights or Sinai or Gaza.\"
From Israeli positions on the snowy, wind-whipped peaks here more than 7,000 feet above sea level, soldiers peer warily over the patchwork of villages their commanders now call \"not Syria, but Syrias,\" most of them in the hands of jihadist rebels fighting the government of President Bashar al-Assad.
In neighboring south Lebanon, the Shiite organization Hezbollah has amassed tens of thousands of increasingly accurate rockets that Israel says could threaten some of its crucial infrastructure.
Across Israel's southern border, the Islamic State is battling Egyptian forces in the Sinai Peninsula. And Hamas, the Islamic militant group that controls the Gaza Strip, boasted recently that it was rebuilding the tunnels that Israel destroyed during 50 days of deadly fighting in 2014. Residents of the Israeli border communities have recorded the clanging sounds of the tunnel diggers.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, touring a new section of a fence along Israel's border with Jordan this week, said the country would soon be surrounded by such fences and high-tech obstacles.
\"In the environment in which we live, we have to protect ourselves from predators,\" he said.
The Israeli military says it is also doing what it can to stabilize the other side of its frontiers.
In the contested portion of the Golan Heights that Israel conquered from Syria and later annexed, the military coordinates with what it describes as the \"moderate\" nonjihadist insurgents on the Syrian side and offers humanitarian aid, including transporting wounded fighters and civilians to Israeli hospitals.
\"Our message is that whoever is ready to be good neighbors with us will profit,\" a senior official from the military's northern command said during a recent tour of the frontier. He spoke on the condition of anonymity under army rules.
Standing on a peak of Mount Hermon a few steps from the Syrian side, the officer described how a wounded Syrian had navigated these steep inclines a few days earlier on a donkey and was brought into Israel.
Directly below, the Druse village of Al Khader is the last point on the Syrian side of the Golan Heights where the population remains loyal to Mr. Assad, an old rival backed in the Syrian conflict by Israel's archenemies, Iran and Hezbollah.
After decades of quiet here, Al Khader has served more recently as a base for attacks against Israeli forces by squads affiliated with the Iranian axis.
Moving south, the Nusra Front, a Sunni insurgent group with links to Al Qaeda, now controls up to 70 percent of Syria's Golan frontier.
And Israel is cautiously eyeing two smaller groups with hundreds of fighters: the Shuhada al-Yarmouk, which is based in a village within plain sight of the Israeli positions and has partly affiliated itself with the Islamic State; and Al Muthanna, about six miles to the east.
On the Israeli side, just below the point where the Syrian and Lebanese borders meet, hundreds of families rode the chairlifts and skied the slopes of the Hermon resort on a recent weekday, seemingly oblivious to the tensions.
So far, the jihadist groups have been busy fighting their own wars in Syria. But the Israeli military worries that as they grow in strength, they will turn their attention to Israel.
Still, the threat that is most engaging the Israelis for now is an invisible one: the Hamas tunnels, and particularly those designed to run beneath the border into Israeli territory, a focal point of the 2014 battle in Gaza.
Mr. Netanyahu warned late last month that if Hamas again tried to attack through tunnels, Israel would take \"much stronger\" action than it did in 2014.
By the end of that war, in which more than 2,100 Palestinians and more than 70 Israelis were killed, Israel said it had destroyed 32 tunnels, including nearly a dozen that ran beneath its border, some of which were used to ambush Israeli forces.
Only the tunnels were not completely destroyed. Instead, in many cases, Israel blew up the entry and exit points or collapsed the middle of a tunnel, without necessarily knowing where all its branches led.
\"The 32 tunnels were neutralized, taken out of use at the time that the operation ended,\" said Atai Shelach, a former commander of the military's combat engineering unit. \"It was only a matter of time until they would be rehabilitated or upgraded.\"
Mr. Shelach, who now heads a company providing engineering products, said that all of Israel's \"closest enemies,\" including Hezbollah in the north, were engaged in tunnel-building and that it had become an important and cruel tool against Israel's regular forces.
Israel has refused to divulge details of technological advances in its ability to locate tunnels, not wanting to provide information that could be useful to its enemies.
But Mr. Shelach said combating the tunnel threat required a combination of factors, including technology, intelligence, defensive measures and the training of forces to fight in the underground medium.
Once again, heavy drills and other engineering equipment are lined up along sections of Israel's border with Gaza. General Alon, the operations chief, said, \"We will do whatever we can to find and destroy tunnels on Israel's side of the border.\"
Naftali Bennett, a cabinet minister from the right-wing Jewish Home Party, and the leader of the parliamentary opposition, Isaac Herzog, of the center-left Zionist Union, have both -- separately -- been agitating for a broader pre-emptive strike against the tunnels in Gaza.
Mr. Netanyahu and other senior officials have hinted that Israel is working through subtler, more covert means.
Lt. Gen. Gadi Eisenkot, the military chief of staff, told Israel Radio this week that the tunnel threat would be a top priority this year, saying cryptically, \"We are making very great efforts, most of which are concealed from the public eye.\"
According to Cogat, the Israeli Army agency responsible for coordination with the Palestinians on civilian matters, at least 11 people in Gaza have been killed in recent weeks as a result of collapses in five tunnels.
Hamas put some of these deaths down to work accidents caused by heavy rains.
When Maan, a Palestinian news agency, asked the Cogat chief, Gen. Yoav Mordechai, whether Israel had a hand in the collapse of the tunnels, he replied, \"God knows.\"
Photograph
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel Toured a New Section of Fence Along the Border with Jordan On Tuesday. (Pool Photo by Marc Israel Sellem)
Word count: 1254
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 12, 2016"
