"Since last weekend, we've seen non-stop coverage of the terrorist bombings in New York and New Jersey. Images of innocent New Yorkers running from the Chelsea explosion seem harrowing and vivid, but sociologist Charles Kurzman says the wall-to-wall coverage -- and our \"zero-tolerance\" approach to terror -- is disproportional compared with other kinds of violence in America. He suggests we reassess how we respond to these threats.
To help put the attacks in context, USA TODAY talked to Kurzman, author of several books on Islam, the Middle East and terrorism.
Q: In 2016, how likely is it that an American will be killed by a terrorist, Muslim or non-Muslim?
A: Fortunately, terrorism has been very rare in the United States. Thus far in 2016, there have been three acts of violent extremism by Muslim-Americans, by my count, resulting in 49 deaths, all of whom were killed in the shooting at a nightclub in Orlando in June. This is the highest death toll from Islamic terrorism that the country has experienced since 2001. There is no comparable count of non-Muslim terrorism in the United States, but the total is also very low. Terrorism frightens people far out of proportion to the actual number of victims -- indeed, that is its primary goal: to create a sense of terror.
Q: You note that since Sept. 11, 2001, 118 people in the United States have been killed by terror attacks perpetrated by Muslim-Americans. Yet in the same 15-year period, more than 230,000 Americans have been murdered, mostly by their fellow Americans. Why the disproportionate response to terrorism?
A: The United States has a zero-tolerance policy for Islamic terrorism, which is quite different from our attitude toward other forms of violence. The country has committed billions of dollars and amended our civil liberties in order to combat terrorism, and many politicians want to go even further.
Q: Why the \"zero-tolerance\" policy for Islamic terrorism, but not for much more pervasive kinds of violence?
A: The country has become fixated on incidents of Islamic terrorism. One reason for this discrepancy may be the concerted political campaign to demonize Muslim-Americans as a wedge issue, which has led anti-Islamic attitudes to increase recently, even as the trauma of 9/11 has receded.
Credit: Greg Toppo, @gtoppo, USATODAY
Illustration
photo Jason Smith
Word count: 410
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
