"Parisians are flocking to first-aid training centers to become qualified first responders as nightmarish thoughts of terrorists grip their minds.
\"We're not trained enough,\" Web designer Marc Lamard, 26, said after completing his first-aid training at a town hall near the site of terrorist attacks in the city last year. \"In case of a wave of panic, you need to stay calm and know what to do.\"
Parisians know terror all too well. On March 22, neighboring Belgium was hit by coordinated attacks that left 32 dead. Last Nov. 13, Islamic militants went on a rampage in the heart of the capital, killing 130 people. Those attacks followed mass shootings in January 2015 at the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo and a Jewish grocery store in which 17 people were killed.
Afterward, many wondered how they could have helped the wounded, said Christophe Talmet, head of the French Red Cross emergency and first-aid training program. Talmet coordinated rescue teams during the attacks.
\"People were saying, 'I have to do something, but I don't know what,'\" Talmet said. \"Something happened, people really felt involved -- it touched them very deeply.\"
As a result, Paris City Hall has been overwhelmed by the response to its offer of free classes to teach Parisians how they can help save lives before emergency services arrive on the scene.
\"We had originally thought we would do this once a year, but we will have to do it again soon,\" said Bernard Jomier, Paris' deputy mayor in charge of health, who initiated the first training event last weekend. \"Our new goal is to give initiation classes to up to 10,000 Parisians this year and to train 10,000 more to become qualified rescuers.\"
Jomier, a physician who was at Paris hospitals the day after the Nov. 13 attacks, recalled long lines of people wanting to donate blood. The mobilization \"was impressive,\" he said \"to the point that we had to tell them not to go because the stocks were full.\"
The French Red Cross normally offers comprehensive emergency training sessions on the weekends.
But two days after the Nov. 13 attacks, the number of Parisians registering to attend via the humanitarian organization's website rose by 40%, Talmet said. Extra training sessions were set up to cater to the demand.
\"People are knocking on our doors, they want to become players,\" Talmet said.
All 3,500 slots were booked during the daylong training sessions organized in each of the city's districts, Jomier said.
\"What can a citizen do in the face of terror, take a weapon, confine himself at home?\" Jomier asked. \"Here we tell him, 'You can act. If something terrible happens, you can be useful.' It is the responsibility of the authorities to show them how they can do it.\"
Participants said they were grateful for the training.
\"When I heard about the attacks, I was both scared and sad, even if it wasn't in my neighborhood,\" Prune Lambert, 16, said as she lined up with her family to observe a Red Cross volunteer demonstrating a CPR technique.
Lambert's brother, Pierre, 13, initially didn't understand why his mother insisted he go, but he said after the training that it would be useful \"should there be another attack.\"
Patrick Pelloux, a former Charlie Hebdo columnist and emergency doctor, was first on the scene after the shooting at the paper's editorial office. He gave first aid to surviving colleagues there and also treated victims of the attacks in November.
\"Civilian defense was abandoned after World War II, so we need to reinvent it,\" Pelloux said.
In 2004, the French government passed a law to teach children basic lifesaving skills. Pelloux said that did not go far enough.
Almost half of French citizens have some first-aid training, Talmet said.
Credit: Sarah Kefi and Maya Vidon, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo GEOFFROY VAN DER HASSELT, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 684
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
