"Americans have absorbed so many shocks since 9/11 that you'd think the nation would have thick emotional calluses by now, but each new attack rips off the bandage and exposes some of the same rage, grief and fear that prevailed on that cloudless fall day almost 15 years ago.
The best leaders respond with grace and resolve in moments of national tragedy, reminding Americans of their common purpose, appealing to their best instincts and outlining reasoned ways to prevent future calamities. And then there's Donald Trump.
The day after the nation's worst mass shooting, the slaughter of 49 people in an Orlando nightclub early Sunday by a Muslim American claiming solidarity with the Islamic State, Trump revived his repellent call for banning all foreign Muslims from entering the United States. The supposedly temporary ban would last until the nation can \"perfectly screen those people coming into our country,\" which, given the imperfection in any human endeavor, would be approximately forever.
The proposed ban is, of course, wholly impractical. Religious affiliation is largely invisible, and any would-be terrorist could simply lie about being Muslim. Nor would new border controls address the problem of radicalized U.S. citizens. The Orlando shooter was born in Queens, N.Y., just like Trump was, to parents who emigrated from Afghanistan decades ago.
Much more important than the practical considerations, a ban on Muslim immigration is an affront to American values, one that would make the United States less safe by undercutting the nation's ability to work with Muslim nations to battle the scourge of radical Islam.
None of this seems to matter to Trump, who continued his toxic habit of conflating the fanatical few with millions of mainstream Muslims throughout America and more than a billion worldwide. The presumed Republican nominee has always had a peculiar obsession with President Obama, but he may have outdone himself by suggesting to Fox News that Obama may know better than he lets on what's behind these terrorist attacks and \"has something else in mind\" besides trying to stop them. Innuendo like this is the tool of demagogues, not someone who aspires to lead the nation.
Obama's response on Tuesday echoed Republican George W. Bush's words after 9/11. \"If we fall into the trap of painting all Muslims with a broad brush, and imply that we are at war with the entire religion -- then we are doing the terrorists' work for them,\" Obama said.
Americans are rightly fearful after an attack like the one in Orlando, but, as the president noted, \"We've gone through moments in our history before when we acted out of fear -- and we came to regret it.\"
During World War II, fear of enemy saboteurs led to the internment of more than 100,000 Japanese Americans. And the Red Scare of the early 1950s fed Sen. Joseph McCarthy's wild accusations about communist sympathizers.
Trump's Muslim ban would be another shameful episode in U.S. history.
Illustration
photo J. Scott Applewhite, AP
Word count: 523
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
