"WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department will release partial transcripts of conversations between the police and the Orlando gunman from the night he carried out a deadly attack at a gay nightclub, Attorney General Loretta Lynch said on Sunday.
The transcripts, expected to be released on Monday, will include three calls between the gunman, Omar Mateen, and negotiators who spoke with him as the massacre was unfolding.
Law enforcement officials will also provide a detailed timeline of those calls.
Ms. Lynch said the calls should shed light on the motivation behind Mr. Mateen's decision to walk into the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Fla., on June 12 and carry out an attack in which 49 people were fatally shot before he was killed by the police.
The announcement came as Ms. Lynch, the nation's top law enforcement official, made rare appearances on five major Sunday morning news programs to discuss the investigation as it entered its second week.
She declined to comment on potential charges in the case but said on CNN's \"State of the Union\" that she considered the shooting both \"an act of terror and an act of hate.\"
Ms. Lynch said the transcripts would not include portions of the calls that would risk \"revictimizing\" those affected by the shooting or could \"further this man's propaganda,\" including Mr. Mateen's pledge of allegiance to the Islamic State.
\"As we have said earlier, he talked about his pledges of allegiance to a terrorist group,\" Ms. Lynch said on CNN.
\"He talked about his motivations for why he was claiming at that time he was committing this horrific act. He talked about American policy in some ways.\"
Ms. Lynch frequently found herself defending aspects of the F.B.I.'s current investigation into the shooting, as well as earlier ones into Mr. Mateen, which have drawn scrutiny for failing to anticipate his actions.
Mr. Mateen was twice under investigation by the F.B.I., once beginning in 2013 after boasting to co-workers that he had ties to terrorist groups and again the following year in connection with a Florida man who tried to carry out a suicide bombing in Syria.
She said that though he had raised suspicions, there was not evidence at the time to suggest Mr. Mateen would actually carry out any attacks.
Asked on ABC's \"This Week\" if she thought there was anything that federal authorities could have done differently leading up to the attack, Ms. Lynch said that her department was still \"looking at that.\"
\"You know, this is an ongoing investigation,\" she said.
\"We are going back and scrubbing every contact we had with this killer.\"
Ms. Lynch also faced questions about a Democratic proposal, endorsed by the Justice Department, that would bar those on federal terrorism watch lists from purchasing firearms.
The Republican-controlled Senate is expected to vote on Monday on that and on other competing proposals.
None of the proposed amendments are expected to pass, but they have exposed some division within the law enforcement community over how to address cases like that of Mr. Mateen.
Ms. Lynch is scheduled to travel to Orlando on Tuesday to review the investigation in person and receive briefings from investigators and federal prosecutors.
She will also meet with emergency workers, victims of the shooting and their family members.
\"The L.G.B.T. and Latino community has come under fire before, but never in as horrific a manner as this,\" Ms. Lynch said on ABC's \"This Week.\"
Word count: 581
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 20, 2016"
