"CORRECTION APPENDED. As Arbab Razvi watched her 4-year-old students play with blocks and beads in her prekindergarten classroom on Coney Island Avenue in Brooklyn, she had to raise her voice -- to scold Senator Ted Cruz.
The day before, in response to the terrorist attacks in Brussels, Mr. Cruz, a Texas Republican running for president, declared that he wanted the police \"to patrol and secure\" Muslim communities in the United States because they might harbor terrorists.
\"When I have these little children, what am I going to tell them?\" Ms. Razvi, 23, said. \"Am I going to tell them when they're above a certain age that somebody is going to monitor them just because they are Muslim? Is that something I have to teach them now?\"
Most of the 18 children in the classroom were new immigrants -- girls and boys from Pakistan, Uzbekistan and Africa. \"I have different skin colors here and all of these students are Muslim,\" Ms. Razvi said. \"How can you label these different faces?\"
Mr. Cruz had also praised the New York Police Department's controversial program for monitoring Muslim communities during the Bloomberg administration, calling it a \"very successful\" counterterrorism operation.
In this neighborhood in Midwood, a Muslim enclave known as Little Pakistan, shop owners and mosque attendees alike dismissed comments from Mr. Cruz as insensitive and incorrect.
Their sentiments were shared by William J. Bratton, the New York police commissioner, who at a news conference in Times Square on Tuesday denounced Mr. Cruz as \"out of line\" and unfit for the White House as Mayor Bill de Blasio stood beside him in support. Mr. Bratton said he wanted to remind Mr. Cruz that there were more than 900 Muslim members of the Police Department.
At the Council of Peoples Organization, a group that serves Muslims, Arabs and South Asians and shares a block with a mosque, Mohammad Razvi, the organization's founder and executive director, had this message about monitoring: \"We are already doing it. To Ted Cruz and others -- we are working hand in hand with law enforcement to make sure nothing happens here. More importantly, if there is something, then we've got to say something and the kids are going to say something.\"
A car marked Civilian Observation Patrol bearing the emblem of the New York Police Department was parked outside the mosque, Makki Masjid, on Wednesday. Nobody was in it. \"He might be at the mosque,\" said Mr. Razvi, whose daughter Arbab is the prekindergarten teacher in the organization's school.
The patrol is made up of volunteers who work in conjunction with the 70th Precinct, he said.
For five years, the Council of Peoples Organization has coordinated a career day with city, state and federal law enforcement agencies including the F.B.I., the Secret Service and the Fire Department. Last year, nearly 700 children attended. \"I didn't want kids to be afraid,\" Mr. Razvi said. And it works both ways.
His organization teaches new F.B.I. agents in the New York metropolitan area about Islam and the cultural differences among Muslims from various countries.
Ali Khan, 59, exiting the mosque, said that highlighting this specific community on the basis of religion \"would be trouble for the Muslims.\"
More than 4,500 residents a year walk through his doors, Mr. Razvi said, showing binders full of discrimination complaints. After the Sept. 11 attacks in New York, he said, South Asian immigrants had the largest number of harassment complaints, more than Muslims of other nationalities.
Zarren Hassan, 27, an American-born woman who was picking up her son at the school, shook her head at Mr. Cruz's declaration. \"We feel like we're being seen in a different way, as terrorists, basically,\" she said. \"Just like racism.\"
Zakarya Khan, the owner of Gyro King, a fast-food restaurant off Foster Avenue, is concerned that a policy like Mr. Cruz's could push people toward extremism. \"You have to involve the community, don't alienate them, integrate them,\" he said. \"This is where we belong. If you want to make this country safe, more safer, then you have to welcome people and make them part of this country.\"
Last year, one of his employees, a 24-year-old immigrant from Uzbekistan named Abdurasul Hasanovich Juraboev, was arrested with two friends by federal agents on suspicion of wanting to join the Islamic State.
\"He worked with me for over a year and seemed to be a very nice guy,\" said Mr. Khan, who is from Afghanistan. \"I hired him through a reference. Now I don't hire anyone besides my own country. I know people coming from my own country.\"
Correction: March 25, 2016, Friday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: A picture caption on Thursday with an article about the reaction of Muslims in the New York region to a statement by Senator Ted Cruz that he wanted the police to \"patrol and secure\" Muslim communities in the United States because they might harbor terrorists misidentified, in some copies, one of the three men shown near the Council of Peoples Organization in Brooklyn. Muntaz Ali is in the center -- not Ali Khan, who is at the right.
Photograph
Muntaz Ali, Center, Near the Council of Peoples Organization in Brooklyn On Wednesday. A Day Before, Senator Ted Cruz Called for Police Officers \"to Patrol and Secure\" Muslim Communities. (Photograph by Brian Harkin for the New York Times)
Word count: 916
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 24, 2016"
