"The British television director Dan Reed has a grisly specialty: documentary reconstructions of major terrorist attacks. He's made \"Terror in Mumbai,\" \"Terror at the Mall\" (about the 2013 attack at a shopping mall in Nairobi, Kenya) and now \"Three Days of Terror: The Charlie Hebdo Attacks,\" all shown on HBO. They're elegant, understated chapters in a dreadful volume.
Like its predecessors, \"Three Days,\" on Monday night, is a highly refined example of the currently popular true-crime genre. Mr. Reed does not spend much time on the reasons for the attacks or the backgrounds of the attackers. He simply tells the particular story, start to finish. He's worked in fiction as well as documentary, on British crime shows like \"Waking the Dead\" and \"Inspector Lewis,\" and you can see his instincts for drama in the pacing and emotional modulations of his terrorism films.
The mood of \"Three Days\" is somber and the presentation calm. Mr. Reed avoids the TV news route, employing quiet interviews with victims, witnesses and responders and raw firsthand footage. The initial January 2015 shootings in the offices of the French magazine Charlie Hebdo are heard in film shot by an employee at a neighboring company who had escaped to the building's roof. As we look at the Paris rooftops, we hear the dull, deliberately spaced gunshots in the Hebdo conference room below. Later, a medical dispatcher cannot comprehend the number of dead and asks that it be repeated: \"One-zero? Two times five?\"
The scenes of two attackers, Saïd and Chérif Kouachi, shooting it out with policemen in the street, and of a phalanx of riot police storming the kosher market where another terrorist, Amedy Coulibaly, was holding prisoners, are riveting but familiar. What sticks with you are the interviews, and the bewilderment of the people who survived.
A man from the next-door office who knew that the attackers had killed a maintenance worker outside wonders what would have happened if he had gone down the hall to warn the Charlie Hebdo staff rather than call the police. An artist who was in the Hebdo conference room struggles to describe the scene, saying: \"My memories are hazy, buried deep. I can't piece them together.\"
A few minutes at the close of the film are given over to discussing the implications of the Hebdo attacks, and then history provides Mr. Reed with some ready-made resonance: A few hours after being interviewed for \"Three Days,\" a title tells us, an emergency doctor for the Paris fire department was called to the Bataclan theater to deal with the even deadlier attacks of November 2015.
Photograph
Three Days of Terror: The Charlie Hebdo Attacks: This Documentary by Dan Reed has Its Premiere On Hbo On Monday. (Photograph Via Hbo)
Word count: 477
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 19, 2016"
