"Seven hard days after it became the site of the worst mass shooting in U.S. history, Orlando remembered the fallen on Sunday with pealing church bells and -- from normally raucous nightclubs to Disney World -- moments of silence.
Thousands participated in an early-evening vigil at Lake Eola Park for the victims of the Pulse nightclub shooting. It was preceded by a memorial service at the Cathedral Church of St. Luke. Mourners planned to march from the church to the lakeside park, carrying flowers, candles and messages of peace.
Several churches held memorial services during the day. Florida Gov. Rick Scott, speaking at First Baptist Church, one of the area's largest churches, said the attacks targeted \"two very vulnerable populations\" -- meaning gays and Latinos.
People prayed on the street and left balloons, flowers, pictures and posters to honor all 49 victims. Some visited a row of 49 white wood crosses made by a retired carpenter from Illinois; others waited in line at Realm Tattoos for a \"One Pulse\" tattoo.
Meanwhile, the investigation continued into why Omar Mateen, 29, invaded the gay nightclub and opened fire around 2a.m. June 12 in an attack that left 49 dead and 53 wounded and ended when Mateen was killed by police who stormed the building. He also pledged allegiance to the Islamic State militant group in a 911 call during the attack.
Eighteen of the wounded victims remained hospitalized Sunday. Four were in critical condition, two were listed as guarded and 12 as stable.
U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch said Sunday that the FBI would release a partial transcript of three conversations between Mateen and Orlando police negotiators that took place while the gunman was inside the club.
Appearing on ABC's This Week, Lynch said authorities hope to create a profile of Mateen to help prevent a similar disaster: \"We are going back and learning everything we can about this killer, about his contacts, people who may have known him or seen him.\" On Tuesday she'll go to Orlando to meet investigators.
Lynch said a key goal of the investigation was to determine why Mateen apparently targeted gays. She declined to say if a federal grand jury was likely to charge Mateen's second wife, Noor Salman, who officials say knew her husband planned the attack.
Investigators are trying to learn more not just about Mateen, but also about others who knew him, including members of the mosque he attended.
Sunday's observances of a week's passage since the attack began when the day was young. The music stopped around 2a.m. at many of the area's nightclubs to mark the moment when the killing began.
Around midnight, after Disney World's usual \"Kiss Goodnight\" announcement, park workers and visitors gathered to pay tribute to the victims. They held glow sticks, smartphones and artificial candles in the air during a moment of silence.
Contributing: Chris Bonanno, Florida Today
Credit: Rick Hampson @rickhampson USA TODAY
Illustration
photo David Goldman, AP
Word count: 524
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
