"Democratic lawmakers launched an extraordinary protest Wednesday, staging a sit-in on the House floor, bringing legislative business to a halt and triggering a chaotic, late-night showdown as they demanded a vote on gun control legislation.
Led by Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., who had called the dramatic protest simply a \"publicity stunt,\" Republicans took back control of the floor at 10 p.m. amid Democrat chants, nearly 11 hours after the sit-in began. Democrats shouted \"Shame! Shame!\" as House business proceeded and members cast votes on a measure unrelated to guns.
Scores of House lawmakers took to the House floor before noon and refused to let Republicans resume regular business until the House votes on gun control. They took turns for hours talking about gun violence, ticking off mass shootings in Newtown, Conn.; Charleston, S.C.; San Bernardino, Calif.; and Orlando, where 49 people were slaughtered and 53 injured June12.
\"What is the tipping point? Are we blind? Can we see? How many more mothers, how many more fathers need to shed tears of grief before we do something?\" said Rep. John Lewis, D-Ga., who kicked off the sit-in. \"We have been too quiet for too long. There comes a time when you have to say something, when you have to make a little noise, when you have to move your feet. This is the time. Now is the time to get in the way. The time to act is now. We will be silent no more.\"
Rep. Ted Poe, R-Texas, attempted to gavel the House into order at noon, but when the Democrats refused to quiet, he gaveled the House into recess instead. When Ryan took to the podium later, he brought the House back into session and proceeded to votes. Republicans remained mostly stone-faced throughout the rowdy Democratic spectacle.
After the votes, the House recessed again, and Democrats returned to their protest speeches on the floor.
Ryan said earlier on CNN that he would not schedule a vote on gun bills that have already been defeated in the Senate. \"This is a publicity stunt,\" Ryan said. \"This isn't trying to come up with a solution to a problem. This is trying to get attention.\"
Senators on Monday voted down four partisan gun measures and were trying to craft a compromise Wednesday that would make it harder for people on terrorist watch lists to get guns.
House Minority Whip Rep. Steny Hoyer, D-Md., suggested it could be a marathon recess.
\"Our people deserve to know where their representatives stand on this issue, just as they now do with their senators,\" Hoyer said. \"Led by civil rights hero Rep. John Lewis, we will be sitting-in until the House is allowed an opportunity to vote. This is an issue that ought to transcend party -- it's about saving lives and keeping our communities safe.\"
Most of the House demonstration was not broadcast on C-SPAN. The network carries feeds from cameras belonging to the House, which are controlled by the majority party and turned off when the House is not in session. Instead, C-SPAN aired video feeds posted by Democrats from the floor via their social media accounts.
Rep. Jared Huffman, D-Calif., accused Republican leadership of not allowing the broadcast, although it is long-standing policy not to show the House floor when the chamber is in recess.
\"The fact is they can cut off the mics, they can cut off the cameras, they will not silence our voice,\" he said as the sit-in approached four hours.
Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi of California went to the floor and called for a moment of silence. Rep. James Clyburn, D-S.C., led a prayer. No one appeared ready to give up anytime soon. \"I am prepared to stay here until hell freezes over,\" Rep. Maxine Waters, D-Calif., said. \"We're here because we can't take it anymore. We can't take burying our young people.\"
Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn, who led a nearly 15-hour gun control demonstration in the Senate last week, went over to the House floor to show his support.
\"This is an extraordinary tactic,\" he said as he headed into the chamber shortly after noon. \"This is an exceptional time.\"
The sit-in was not the first time lawmakers staged a protest after the cameras were turned off. In 2008, Republicans demanded a vote on oil drilling, but the Democratic majority under then-speaker Pelosi voted to adjourn and turned off the lights. Republicans came to the empty House chamber for days to make speeches about oil production and rail against what they said was unfair treatment by Democrats.
At the White House, spokesman Josh Earnest said House Democrats are \"are showing the kind of frustration and even anger that people around the country have.\"
\"What Democrats are asking for is neither radical nor controversial,\" he said, citing polls showing that expanded background checks are favored by large majorities of people, including gun owners.
Contributing: Gregory Korte and Erin Kelly
Credit: Donovan Slack, and Deborah Barfield Berry, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Rep. Suzanne Bonamici, D-Ore., via AP
Word count: 876
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
