"WASHINGTON -- When President Obama woke up in Havana on Tuesday to news that explosives had ripped through an airport and a subway in Brussels, it was a familiar, if disconcerting, feeling: another foreign trip overshadowed by violence elsewhere in the world.
Mr. Obama embarked on the juggling act of a traveling commander in chief faced with a crisis: a morning briefing on the terrorist attacks with officials in Washington inside a specially equipped secure communications room, and an expression of condolence and support for the Belgian people inserted at the last minute into his speech to the Cuban people.
\"We stand in solidarity with them in condemning these outrageous attacks against innocent people,\" Mr. Obama declared in the Gran Teatro de la Habana. \"We will do whatever is necessary to support our friend and ally Belgium in bringing to justice those who are responsible.\"
Mr. Obama's disrupted trips -- he has had at least three before this one -- speak to a broader tension that has run through his foreign policy from the start: between his efforts to cultivate ties with old foes or expand the United States' influence in new regions, and the pull of the nation's perennial obligations in the Middle East.
In November, Mr. Obama set off on a round-the-world trade and economic mission to Turkey, Malaysia and the Philippines. Hours before he left, terrorists attacked in Paris, killing 130 people. Rather than showcase the Trans-Pacific Partnership, his Asian trade agreement, the president ended up fielding questions about how to battle the Islamic State and whether to bar Syrian refugees from entering the United States.
In March 2011, Mr. Obama landed in Brazil for a five-day tour of South America. In between efforts to promote economic ties with Brazil, he ordered American warplanes to Libya as part of a NATO mission to avert a slaughter in Benghazi by Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Twenty months later, Mr. Obama was in Southeast Asia for a historic visit to Myanmar, with which he had opened diplomatic ties. But he found himself huddled with Hillary Clinton, the secretary of state, struggling with how to respond to a military clash between Israel and Hamas in Gaza. Mrs. Clinton flew to Israel and Egypt to negotiate a cease-fire.
In Cuba on Tuesday, Mr. Obama stuck to his schedule, going to a baseball game between the Cuban national team and the Tampa Bay Rays. But inevitably, given the political season, he was second-guessed back home: Gov. John Kasich of Ohio and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas said he should either return to Washington to direct the response to the attacks or fly straight to Belgium.
Hours after the last pitch had been thrown, Donald J. Trump wrote on Twitter that Mr. Obama should leave the game immediately and go home, where the president \"under a serious emergency belongs!\"
Mr. Obama's decision set up a memorable moment in the middle of the game. The president, wearing sunglasses, khaki slacks and a white shirt, was asked by an ESPN reporter whether he had thought about skipping it.
\"It's always a challenge when you have a terrorist attack anywhere in the world, particularly in this age of 24/7 news coverage,\" Mr. Obama said. \"You want to be respectful and understand the gravity of the situation, but the whole premise of terrorism is to try to disrupt people's ordinary lives.\"
For the president, who travels with a full complement of national security and communications aides, the biggest disruption from a crisis like the one in Brussels is not logistical but thematic. The issues he had hoped to highlight -- in this case, his diplomatic opening to Cuba -- were eclipsed by round-the-clock coverage of violent images from somewhere else.
For all the sophisticated communications gear that follows the president around the world, the White House has struggled to get its message right when he is overseas during a crisis. Last fall, at a meeting of the Group of 20 countries in Antalya, Turkey, Mr. Obama played down fears about the Islamic State, five days after the mass killings in Paris.
His low-key manner played poorly in the United States, which was already in the heat of a primary season. By the time Mr. Obama arrived at his next stop, in Manila, several Republican candidates were calling for the United States to bar all refugees from Syria. That, Mr. Obama said in a news conference with the Philippine president, Benigno S. Aquino Jr., would amount to a \"recruitment tool\" for the Islamic State.
Even Mr. Obama's holidays are routinely disrupted by events in the Middle East. In August 2014, critics faulted him for returning to the golf course on Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts after condemning the beheading of an American freelance journalist, James Foley, by an Islamic State fighter. (The president later said that was a mistake.)
In December 2009, Mr. Obama was on his first Christmas holiday in Hawaii as president when a 23-year-old Nigerian man tried to blow up a Northwest Airlines jetliner en route to Detroit. On that occasion, the president came under criticism for waiting several days before speaking out about the episode. It was a mistake he did not make again.
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter .
Word count: 902
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 24, 2016"
