"JERUSALEM -- Two 14-year-old Palestinian boys fatally stabbed an off-duty Israeli soldier and wounded another Israeli man on Thursday in an Israeli supermarket in the occupied West Bank where Israelis and Palestinians work and shop together.
Armed civilians shot and wounded both assailants at the scene. The attack was the latest in more than four months of violence, and it came as senior Israeli officials clashed over the degree of force to be used against Palestinian minors wielding knives.
Palestinians using guns, knives and vehicles as weapons have killed at least 28 Israelis since Oct 1. Israeli forces have killed at least 160 Palestinians during the same period, as many as two-thirds of them assailants, according to the Israeli authorities. The others died in clashes with Israeli security forces.
The Israeli military identified the off-duty soldier who was killed on Thursday as Sgt. Tuvia (Yanai) Wiessman, 21, a resident of a nearby Jewish settlement, Maale Mikhmas. The Palestinian news media identified the assailants as Ayham Bassam Ibrahim Subih and Omar Salim Rimawi, residents of Beituniya, a Palestinian town on the outskirts of the West Bank city of Ramallah.
The attack took place in the aisles of the Rami Levy supermarket in an Israeli-run industrial zone in the Ramallah area. Two Israeli civilians described on Israeli television how they had used their personal weapons to shoot the assailants.
As Israel has grappled with the recent wave of violence, Palestinian officials, human rights organizations and some international leaders have accused the Israeli military and police of using excessive force. Critics have accused Israeli forces of shooting to kill, including some instances, captured on video, in which the assailants no longer appeared to be posing a mortal threat.
Israeli leaders have vehemently denied those charges, praising the forces -- and occasionally, armed guards and civilians -- for acting effectively and in legitimate self-defense.
But speaking to high school students on Wednesday, Lt. Gen. Gadi Eisenkot, the chief of staff of the Israeli military, urged caution and restraint. The military, he said, \"must not speak in catchphrases such as 'whoever comes to slay you, slay him first,' or state that anyone holding a knife or a pair of scissors must be killed.\" His remarks implied criticism of some Israeli politicians who have said that Palestinian assailants who attack Jews should know that they will not emerge alive.
General Eisenkot added: \"There were places where a 13-year-old girl was holding a pair of scissors or a knife, and there was a barricade between her and the troops. I wouldn't want a soldier to open fire and empty a magazine on a girl like that, even if she's doing something extremely serious. You have to exercise the correct amount of force necessary to carry out the mission.\"
Israel's defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, gave his backing to General Eisenkot after some right-wing politicians criticized his remarks. Speaking at a college in northern Israel on Thursday, Mr. Yaalon, who is from the governing Likud Party, said that Israel was dealing \"with an iron fist against terrorists.\" But he warned Israelis against being trigger-happy, urging them to act judiciously and to avoid harming innocent people.
Yisrael Katz, another Likud minister, questioned the wisdom of Gen. Eisenkot's remarks, writing on Facebook shortly after the attack in the supermarket that he hoped they \"were not misinterpreted and did not cause any hesitation, endangering lives.\" He added that when Jewish lives were at risk, \"terrorists must not remain alive.\"
Photograph
Israeli Security Forces After an Attack Thursday at a Supermarket in the West Bank. Civilians Shot and Wounded the Assailants. (Photograph by Ahmad Gharabli/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 626
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 19, 2016"
