"A senior Islamic State militant whom the United States military tried to kill in an airstrike in Syria last week has died of his wounds, according to a senior Pentagon official.
The militant, Omar al-Shishani, was the Islamic State's minister of war, according to the Pentagon. The name was an Arab pseudonym for Omar the Chechen, though he was a Georgian national.
The airstrike occurred March 4 near the Syrian city of Shaddadi, where he had gone \"to bolster\" Islamic State fighters after \"a series of strategic defeats to local forces\" that are being supported by the United States, the Pentagon said last Tuesday in a statement that announced the airstrike.
At the time, the Pentagon said it was still assessing whether he had been killed. Soon after the strike, jihadists claimed on social media that Mr. Shishani had been wounded, but survived the attack. The senior Pentagon official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss confidential intelligence assessments, said Monday that the United States had confirmed Mr. Shishani's death, but declined to say precisely when he died or how American spy agencies knew that.
Mr. Shishani, whose real name was Tarkhan Tayumurazovich Batirashvili, was among thousands of foreign fighters who flocked to Syria in recent years to join the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.
According to the Pentagon, he led Islamic State fighters in many battles in Iraq and Syria. He was said to have overseen the group's prison near Raqqa.
Last May, the State Department offered up to $5 million for information on his whereabouts.
His absence, the Pentagon said, would impede the Islamic State's \"ability to recruit foreign fighters -- especially those from Chechnya and the Caucasus regions -- and degrade ISIL's ability to coordinate attacks and defense of its strongholds.\"
Mr. Shishani was considered something of an enigma, even within the Islamic State.
Despite being widely thought of as a leader and a warrior, some called him \"Abu Meat\" because he had a reputation for sitting in a control room and sending young men to their deaths.
Credit: ERIC SCHMITT and MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT; Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting from New York.
Word count: 370
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 15, 2016"
