"BRUSSELS -- Two more people were detained and charged on Monday as part of the investigation into the deadly attacks in the Belgian capital last month, bringing to more than 20 the number of people charged in Belgium in connection with the assaults in Brussels, Paris or both, the federal prosecutor said on Tuesday.
The two men were identified as Smail F., born in 1984, and Ibrahim F., born in 1988, and there were \"indications\" that both were connected to the rental of an apartment in Etterbeek, a district of Brussels, used by at least two of the five people thought to have been directly involved in the March 22 attacks at Brussels Airport and a subway station, the prosecutor's statement said.
The two were charged on Monday with participation in the activities of a terrorist group, terrorist murder and attempted terrorist murder either as perpetrators or accomplices, the prosecutor said, but the extent of their involvement in the plot was unclear. The Brussels assaults in March killed 32 people, along with three of the attackers.
The apartment in Etterbeek, on Avenue des Casernes, was used by Khalid el-Bakraoui and Osama Krayem, the two men who carried out the bombing at the Maelbeek subway station in Brussels, said Claude Moniquet, a former French intelligence officer who lives in Belgium and has been following the case closely.
Mr. Bakraoui and Mr. Krayem left the Etterbeek location on the day of the assaults, he said. The other team of attackers, which included Mr. Bakraoui's brother, Ibrahim; Najim Laachraoui; and Mohamed Abrini, departed from a house in Schaerbeek, on Rue Max Roos. The Bakraoui brothers and Mr. Laachraoui died in the attacks.
On Tuesday morning, the authorities conducted a raid in Uccle, one of the 19 boroughs that make up Brussels, as part of their investigation into the Nov. 13 attacks in and around Paris, which killed 130 people. Three people were held, and a judge is to decide on Wednesday whether to keep them in detention.
Most of the people who have been charged in Belgium are in detention, and those who have been released are subject to conditions such as daily checks with the police.
AuthorAffiliation
ALISSA J. RUBIN Follow Alissa J. Rubin on Twitter @Alissanyt.
Word count: 396
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 13, 2016"
