"PHOENIX -- Federal prosecutors opened their case here on Wednesday against a man accused of being the mastermind behind a thwarted attack last year at an anti-Islam cartoon exhibit in Texas that left two gunmen dead in a shootout.
In her opening statement, an assistant United States attorney, Kristen Brook, accused the man, Abdul Malik Abdul Kareem, of being the bankroller, the trainer and the motivator in a plot to travel to Garland, Tex., and open fire on an event that showcased artwork and cartoons depicting the Prophet Muhammad. The gunmen, Elton Simpson, 30, and Nadir Soofi, 34, were shot and killed.
Ms. Brook described Mr. Kareem as \"the third man on a team set on mass murder\" with \"a desire to kill disbelieving Americans.\" The trial is the first by the federal government linked to a terrorist act inspired by the Islamic extremists.
The defense lawyer, Daniel D. Maynard, rejected the government's characterization of Mr. Kareem as being the instigator of the attack, labeling the accusations as a case of \"overactive imagination by the government.\"
Mr. Kareem, 44, has denied having any knowledge of the plot or of the cartoon contest until after the attack. Trying to link Mr. Kareem to Islamic extremists, Mr. Maynard said, was an attempt to make him \"guilty by association.\"
Mr. Maynard introduced jurors to an entirely different man -- an African-American Muslim convert, the son of a Philadelphia police officer, who owned a moving company and often took in workers who had no place to live. He asked Mr. Kareem to stand up, which Mr. Kareem did, cracking a faint smile to jurors. \"This is the man that the government has accused of all of these heinous crimes,\" Mr. Maynard told them.
Mr. Kareem is facing two counts of conspiracy and one each of transporting firearms and ammunition over state lines, being a felon in possession of firearms and lying to investigators about his role in and knowledge of the Garland attack.
On May 3, 2015, Mr. Simpson, 30, and Mr. Soofi, 34, dressed in body armor, stepped into the parking lot of the Curtis Culwell Center and opened fire with semiautomatic rifles, hitting an unarmed security guard. Mr. Simpson and Mr. Soofi, who lived together in Phoenix, were killed by a Garland traffic officer.
Mr. Maynard said his client was having dinner with a nephew at a Red Lobster in Phoenix at the time and was unaware that the attack was taking place.
Ms. Brook argued that Mr. Kareem urged the two men to commit violence in the name of the Islamic State. Together, they watched videos of beheadings and executions, she said, researched travel to the Middle East to join the terrorist group and considered blowing up the stadium outside Phoenix during last year's Super Bowl, but could not get the explosives in time.
On April 21, Ms. Brooks said, Mr. Kareem downloaded a 55-minute English-language video titled \"Flames of War,\" used by Islamic extremists as a tool of recruitment and of glorification of the fighters in its ranks. Two days later, Mr. Simpson wrote about the cartoon contest on Twitter -- \"Will they ever learn.\" In May, moments before the Garland attack, he posted, \"May Allah accept us as Mujahideen.\"
Mr. Kareem slouched at the defendant's table Wednesday, his lips parted as he listened to the prosecution's first witness, Bruce Joiner, the security guard injured in Garland. Gone were the shaggy beard he sported in previous hearings and the chains that bound his wrists and ankles.
Mr. Joiner painstakingly described his encounter with Mr. Simpson and Mr. Soofi at the center's parking lot; he recalled one of the men's \"surreal smile.\" Mr. Joiner said he ducked behind a tree, not realizing he had been hit in his left leg, just above the bootline.
The trial is expected to last five weeks and include testimony from dozens of witnesses, including Mr. Soofi's 9-year-old son and younger brother, who prosecutors said watched the videos with Mr. Simpson and Mr. Soofi.
Photograph
Abdul Malik Abdul Kareem
Word count: 693
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 18, 2016"
