"DALLAS -- The gunman who fatally shot five police officers in Dallas last week had bomb-making skills and a large cache of material to build bombs, the city's police chief said on Monday, but investigators still do not know how he learned to make explosives or how he planned to use them.
\"He knew what he was doing -- this was not some novice,\" Chief David O. Brown said, based on a search of the killer's home. Detectives are trying to determine \"what's on his laptop, how he learned that.\"
The gunman, Micah Johnson, was a carpentry and masonry specialist in the Army Reserve, which would not explain his knowledge of explosives, the chief said, adding, \"You can learn all that online, I guess.\"
During a standoff after the shooting, Mr. Johnson, 25, told the police that he had planted explosives, but they have not found any. The standoff ended when officers killed him.
\"The concern is we haven't found something that's out there,\" Chief Brown said. \"I don't know whether or not he planned to escape, and then the bombing would start. We just don't know how the bombing aspects of his plan were going to play out.\"
The chief made his comments amid another day of protests, vigils and calls for peace around the country after a week of unsettling violence that began with the fatal police shootings of Alton Sterling in Baton Rouge, La., and Philando Castile in Falcon Heights, Minn.
The city attorney in St. Paul, the site of demonstrations since Mr. Castile's death, said on Monday that 46 adult protesters arrested during a blockade of Interstate 94 on Saturday night would be charged with third-degree riot, a gross misdemeanor. Bail was set at $1,500, and the city attorney's office said protesters could make their initial court appearances as early as Tuesday. No charging decision was announced for one juvenile arrested during the protest.
Separately, county prosecutors charged one man with felony second-degree riot and accused of him of throwing rocks and construction debris at officers during the highway shutdown.
And in Baton Rouge, law enforcement officials defended themselves from criticism over their response to protests over the weekend when over 180 people were arrested.
Amid the protests, a shooting in a Michigan courthouse on Monday underscored the danger faced by law enforcement personnel. Two court bailiffs were fatally shot in St. Joseph, in southwestern Michigan, before the gunman was killed, sheriff officials said.
At a wide-ranging news conference, Chief Brown reiterated that the sheer volume of bomb-making material in Mr. Johnson's home in Mesquite, a Dallas suburb, indicated that he had planned more mayhem. \"One of the bomb techs called me at home to describe his concern of how large a stockpile of bomb-making materials he had,\" he said.
Mr. Johnson, armed with a rifle and a handgun, and clad in body armor, opened fire Thursday night on officers who were monitoring a demonstration in downtown Dallas against shootings by the police in Louisiana and Minnesota. In addition to the five officers who were killed, Chief Brown said, nine officers were wounded -- officials had previously said seven -- as were two civilians. He said that 11 officers had returned fire, revised from the figure of 12 given earlier in the investigation.
The chief has said that during the standoff inside El Centro College, Mr. Johnson, who was black, told police negotiators that he specifically wanted to kill white officers. His Facebook page indicated support for black militant groups that have advocated violence against white people.
Chief Brown said that since the shootings, officers nationwide were on edge about angry or unstable people \"who could do grave damage to us,\" and revealed that he had received a death threat delivered to the department's Facebook page.
\"There is a heightened sense of awareness around threats we've received all over the country,\" he said.
The police investigation in Dallas is enormous in scope, and Chief Brown said that until it was completed, he could not say definitively what law enforcement officials now believe: that Mr. Johnson acted alone. Detectives are poring over 170 hours of video taken by officers' body cameras, he said, and \"countless hours\" of video from police dashboard cameras, security cameras at local businesses and more than 300 witness interviews.
President Obama, who cut short a trip to Europe after the shooting, plans to visit Dallas on Tuesday and to attend a memorial service for the fallen officers. Chief Brown said he had enlisted surrounding police agencies to provide security for the president's visit, not wanting to put that added burden on his fatigued officers.
On Monday, the president joined a meeting between law enforcement officials and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., and he plans to meet at the White House on Wednesday with law enforcement officials, civil rights activists and others to discuss ways to improve relations between minority communities and the police.
Funerals for the officers will begin on Wednesday, and Chief Brown said attending them was \"going to be the most challenging thing in my life.\"
On Monday, The Blaze, the news site founded by the conservative pundit Glenn Beck, posted a snippet of an interview with Mr. Johnson's parents, who expressed surprise and dismay at their son's actions.
\"I don't know what to say to anybody to make anything better; I didn't see it coming,\" said the father, James Johnson. \"I loved my son, all my heart. I hate what he did.\"
The attacker's mother, Delphine Johnson, said that the military \"was not what Micah thought it would be,\" and that her son, who served for several months in Afghanistan and had wanted to be a police officer when he was a boy, was \"very disappointed\" with his experience in the service.
In a written summary of the interview, which is to be broadcast this week, The Blaze reported that Micah Johnson, according to his parents, had \"displayed a noticeable change in behavior\" after his discharge in 2015. Ms. Johnson said that her son had transformed from an extrovert into a \"hermit\" after serving in the military.
After his discharge, Mr. Johnson began studying black history in depth, his father said. But members of his family told the news agency that he had never shown signs of animosity toward whites or other races.
At Parkland Hospital, doctors held an emotional news conference on Monday, recounting their experiences treating seven officers on Thursday night, including some who did not survive.
\"That I was unable to save those cops when they came here that night, it weighs on my mind constantly,\" said Dr. Brian E. Williams, a trauma surgeon.
His voice breaking, Dr. Williams, who is black, said he was deeply hurt by both the deaths of black people in police custody, and by violence aimed against the police. \"Black men dying and being forgotten, people retaliating against the people that are sworn to defend us -- we have to come together and end all this,\" he said.
Officials have said that when it became clear that Mr. Johnson would not surrender peacefully, they killed him with an explosive delivered by a bomb squad robot. Chief Brown defended that move, which has been second-guessed.
\"This wasn't an ethical dilemma for me,\" he said. \"I'd do it again to save lives.\"
Credit: ALAN BLINDER, RICHARD FAUSSET and RICHARD PEREZ-PENA; Alan Blinder and Richard Fausset reported from Dallas, and Richard Perez-Pena from New York.
Photograph
Members of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department and the Department of Public Safety Highway Patrol at a Service for the Slain Officers Monday in Tyler, Tex. (Photograph by Andrew D. Brosig/Tyler Morning Telegraph, Via Associated Press)
Word count: 1299
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 12, 2016"
