"BRUSSELS -- Around the world, this city of great, if often ramshackle, charm has become Exhibit A in the case against immigration, particularly when it involves large numbers of Muslims.
Donald J. Trump called the Belgian capital \"a hellhole,\" while Lubomir Zaoralek, the foreign minister of the Czech Republic, recently cited the city to explain why his and other Eastern European countries had steadfastly resisted a plan by the European Union to spread Syrian and other Muslim refugees around the Continent under a quota system.
\"All the people in the Czech Republic and in other countries see what happened in Molenbeek,\" he told a security conference in Slovakia over the weekend, referring to the Brussels borough where many of those involved in the attacks in Paris on Nov. 13 and in Brussels on March 22 grew up.
A closer look at what has happened in Molenbeek and other heavily immigrant parts of Brussels, however, provides a far more nuanced picture than just a generation of badly integrated young Muslim immigrants running amok. In some ways, it debunks the view that Islam is a one-size-fits-all faith that fuels terrorism.
It is true that all those so far identified in connection with the Paris and Brussels carnage were young Muslims from immigrant families. But a more significant marker than their faith was their shared origin in North Africa, especially Morocco. None was from Brussels' large community of Turks, who share the same religion and the same discrimination, as well as other hardships that are often cited as a root cause of jihadist rage against the West.
Brussels first became a magnet for Muslim immigrants in the 1960s, when the Belgian government eagerly invited workers from Morocco and Turkey to move to Belgium to take jobs in factories and mines. The two countries were regarded as generally pro-Western and full of poor and hard-working people eager for jobs in Europe, unlike many developing nations that at the time were frothing with rage at European colonialism and racked by conflict.
\"You wish to come and work in Belgium? We Belgians are happy that you are coming to bring to our country the support of your strength and your intelligence,\" read a message from the minister of labor posted at Belgium's embassy and consulates in Morocco in 1964. Similar notices went up a year later in Turkey.
Together, Belgians of Moroccan and Turkish origin today account for the vast majority of the capital city's Muslim population, and both groups are heir to a fairly relaxed form of Islam that has none of the reactionary dogmatism of Saudi Arabia and some other Arab states.
So how was it that some Moroccans became so angry, alienated and, in some cases, radicalized? \"There is a malaise within the community of Moroccan origin,\" the mayor of Molenbeek, Françoise Schepmans, said, dismissing arguments that terrorism is a byproduct of religious faith.
Left-wing politicians and community leaders, she said, had missed and amplified the trouble brewing in Molenbeek by treating young Belgian-Moroccans as victims who had no chance of succeeding. \"There is a strong sentiment of victimhood,\" she said, noting that \"Turks have also endured discrimination but there is a force in their community.\"
Much of this force comes from the Turkish state, which controls many of the mosques attended by Belgian-Turks and keeps a close eye on potentially wayward elements in the community through a well-established network of local leaders and imams who are trained in Turkey and then sent to Belgium at the government's expense.
At a Turkish mosque in Molenbeek run by Diyanet, Turkey's state-controlled religious affairs agency, the imam, who speaks only Turkish, expressed revulsion at the March attacks in Brussels and said that he and his worshipers never tolerate extremist views. He stressed that his congregants respect and follow the law.
Worshipers at a nearby Moroccan mosque angrily shooed away reporters, accusing them of fanning \"Islamophobia\" and stigmatizing their neighborhood as a haven of jihadists.
In contrast to Belgium's Turks, the Moroccan community is far more divided and resistant to authority, in part because many of the early immigrants came from the Rif, a rebellious Berber-speaking region often at odds with the ruling monarchy in Morocco. \"When emigration to Europe started, the king was happy to get rid of these people,\" said Bachir M'Rabet, a youth worker of Moroccan descent in Molenbeek.
Another source of anger in his community, he added, is that many Turks often speak poor French and no Dutch, Belgium's two main languages, and cling to their Turkish identity, while most Moroccans speak fluent French and aspire to be accepted fully as Belgians. This, he said, means that many Moroccans feel discrimination more acutely and, at least in the case of young men on the margins, tend to view even minor slights as proof that the entire system is against them.
Philippe Moureaux, who served for two decades as Molenbeek's mayor, described this as \"the paradox of integration.\" A less-integrated Turkish community has resisted the promise of redemption through jihad offered by radical zealots. Yet, a Moroccan community that is more at home in French-speaking Brussels has seen some of its young fall prey to recruiters like Khalid Zerkani, a Moroccan-born petty criminal who became the Islamic State's point man in Molenbeek.
\"The Turks suffer much less from an identity crisis,\" Mr. Moureaux said. \"They are proud to be Turks and are much less tempted by extremism.\"
Suspicion of and hostility toward authority, particularly the police force, run so deep among some North African immigrants in Molenbeek that when the police mobilized in the area this month to prevent a group of anti-immigrant right-wing hooligans from staging a rally, local youths, mostly young men of Moroccan descent, began hurling abuse and objects at the police.
Molenbeek immigrants of Turkish or other backgrounds generally have a less hostile view of the police. A Turkish shopkeeper who runs a general store near the police station said he feared not the police but aggressive North African youths who accuse him of being a bad Muslim because he sells alcohol. He noted that the youths steal, which is also forbidden.
Emir Kir, the Belgian-Turkish mayor of Saint-Josse-ten-Noode, a heavily immigrant Brussels borough that is worse off economically than Molenbeek, said the only Turk he knew about who had tried to go to Syria was a young man who had fallen in love with a girl of Moroccan descent. He got as far as Istanbul before being sent back. \"This was a love affair, not an act of extremism,\" he said.
Photograph
Amarket in Molenbeek, the Section of Brussels Where Many of Those Involved in the Recent Attacks in Paris and Brussels Grew Up.; a Tram Stop in Molenbeek, Which has Many Immigrant Families From North Africa, Particularly Morocco, As Well As Turkey. (Photographs by Daniel Berehulak for the New York Times)
Word count: 1164
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 20, 2016"
