"Ted Elliott, a gay college senior from Maine, said he was not jumping to conclusions that the Orlando mass shooting was a hate crime against gay people or an act of terrorism. Mr. Elliott, a self-described liberal, blamed weak gun laws for endless violence.
\"Shooting A is the same as Shooting B is the same as Shooting C,\" said Mr. Elliott, 21.
Yet for Leonard Faucher, a Donald J. Trump supporter in Houston, the rampage was clearly terrorism.
\"All of this is a clash between the cultures,\" said Mr. Faucher, 69, referring to Islam and the United States.
The location of the attacks, a popular gay club, proved the killer's motive to Corrie Yackulic, a lawyer who lives near Seattle.
\"It's an anti-gay bias,\" said Ms. Yackulic, 58. \"If you're trying to take down the American government, you don't attack a gay bar in Orlando.\"
Rarely has American reaction to a human tragedy been as divided as the striking and complex array of opinions about the deaths of 49 people in Orlando. While gun violence often cleaves people into predictable, politically identifiable camps, and terrorist attacks tend to unite countries in grief and resolve, Orlando has so far defied easy categorizations and conclusions.
Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, for instance, seized on the attacks on Monday to renew his call for a ban on Muslim immigration, but he also lavished empathy on gay people -- many of whom oppose his bid -- and defended their desire to \"love who they want and express their identity.\"
His Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton, and many party leaders argued that fighting homegrown terrorists required tougher gun laws. Yet some liberals and intellectuals argued that gun control was not the only problem, noting that there were parts of Islam and the Quran hostile to homosexuality.
\"The left is very worried about homophobia but it's also very worried about Islamophobia, so there is going to be some real cognitive dissonance on the left as people talking about a Muslim killing many gay people,\" said Jonathan Haidt, a social psychologist and professor at New York University's Stern School of Business.
And many gay people, while agreeing that Orlando was a terrorist attack, said they were offended that some Republican officials have refused to acknowledge that the massacre could be considered a hate crime -- or even to use the word \"gay\" in talking about it. In remarks from the Capitol on Monday, Senator Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, condemned the Islamic State as a group that \"crucifies children and beheads women\" but notably omitted any mention of gays.
In Britain on Sunday, an openly gay journalist stormed off the set of Sky News program, which was founded by Rupert Murdoch, after becoming frustrated that the show's host was portraying Orlando as an attack on the freedom of all people rather than discussing \"it as an attack on L.G.B.T. people.\"
The conversations in America and overseas were in stark contrast to the aftermath of the killings of 26 children and staff members at Sandy Hook Elementary School in 2012, when virtually everyone was talking about gun control and mental health. After the attacks last fall in Paris and San Bernardino, Calif., the global conversation turned to radicalized Muslims bent on terrorist attacks. And violence against gay, lesbian and transgender people has led to frequent and alarmed discussions among gay people.
No such clarity exists around Orlando, at least for now. As people absorb the dimensions of the attack, it is hard to predict how most Americans will be talking about it in a week or month, let alone around the presidential election in November.
\"It's probably along the lines of all three equally,\" said Tina Weidenhammer, 33, of Chicago, a lesbian who has a dog-walking business. She said she and her friends were inspired by the support from family members, but worried that Orlando could have a ripple effect for gay people.
\"Our concern is, this is open hunting season if you really wanted to go after gays,\" Ms. Weidenhammer, noting the many Gay Pride Month festivals in June. \"We are more concentrated and congregating publicly with, literally, our colors.\"
In interviews with about 20 Americans across the country on Monday, most said they were still trying to make sense of the attack and viewed it as more complicated than other recent terrorist events. Several also predicted that it would become a defining part of the presidential race. Ioanna Hawk, 41, a schoolteacher and costume designer who lives in Pasadena, Calif., said she was concerned not only that \"the access to guns is too much\" for potential terrorists and others in America, but also that Orlando would be exploited for political gain.
\"One of the first things I thought when it happened was, Trump's going to use this to get more votes,\" she said.
Trump campaign advisers insisted on Monday that the candidate was not trying to use the gunman, Omar Mateen, for political advantage, but attempting to speak bluntly about the ties between recent attacks and Muslim immigration.
And several supporters of Mr. Trump called his comments refreshing because he was willing to highlight radicalized Muslims -- rather than speak more generally about terrorism and gun violence. They also praised his comments on Monday noting that gay people, like other Americans, were targets of Muslim terrorists.
\"Obviously, the lefties immediately see an opportunity to yell about gun control and somehow think people will believe that gun confiscation will end all this violence,\" said Paul Chevalier, a retired officer in the Marines who is active in Republican politics in New Hampshire. \"Obama refuses to link any of this terrorism to Islam or even 'radical Islam,' so I think most Americans are beginning to think that Trump is our best hope for ever defeating this scourge on the world.\"
Deirdre McCloskey, a transgender woman who is an economist at the University of Illinois at Chicago, said she shuddered at the thought of Mr. Trump gaining mileage as a result of the shooting.
\"I take Orlando as terrorism, that is, violence for a political purpose. It especially disturbs me as a citizen of a democracy, not as a queer. That is why The Donald's immediate use of the fears it arouses to further his plans for fascist-leaning populism alarms me,\" she said. \"It can happen here.\"
The breadth of reactions did not surprise some experts in human behavior. Professor Haidt noted studies showing that people's reaction to scientific evidence was very different depending on whether they saw the policy implications of the science as politically desirable.
\"So when we hear news reports, we don't decide what happened and then decide what to do about it,\" he said. \"Rather, we know what we want to do, and we interpret what happened in the way that will best help us do what we want to do.\"
Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.
Credit: PATRICK HEALY; Reporting was contributed by Julie Bosman and Mitch Smith from Chicago; Katharine Q. Seelye from Portland, Me.; Ian Lovett from Los Angeles; Manny Fernandez from Houston; Kirk Johnson from Seattle; and Jeremy W. Peters from Washington.
Word count: 1223
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 14, 2016"
