"JERUSALEM -- The debate about national identity among Israel's Arab minority and its representatives in Parliament burst out again after three Arab lawmakers met recently with the families of Palestinians killed by Israeli forces when they attacked Jews.
The lawmakers, members of the Balad faction of the Knesset, or Parliament, were censured this week by the legislature. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said they had overstepped the boundaries of appropriate behavior, declaring from the podium of Parliament, \"There is such a thing as national pride.\"
A leading Arab lawmaker suggested that such questions of pride were not so single-minded for him and his colleagues.
\"We are Arab Palestinians, and we are also Israeli citizens,\" Ayman Odeh, the leader of the Joint List of predominantly Arab parties, said. \"There is always tension between the two identities.\"
The controversy over the lawmakers' meetings exposed again the inherent frictions and complex emotions dividing Israel's Jewish majority and its Arab citizens, who make up about a fifth of the country's population of more than eight million. The Arab lawmakers and many of their constituents identify themselves as Palestinians in terms of nationality, while they are afforded the rights of citizenship in the Jewish state. The country's conservative government, which holds a slim majority in Parliament, has said it recognizes the importance of integrating Arab citizens, but bristles when Arab Israelis identify closely with the Palestinian cause.
The absence of any substantive Israeli-Palestinian peace talks and the recent surge in Palestinian stabbing and shooting attacks against Israelis have only compounded the political pressure and raised the public's anxiety.
Israeli Jews were particularly incensed at reports that the Arab lawmakers had stood for a moment of silence, suggesting sympathy and support for the Palestinian assailants. The lawmakers said that they had been reciting the Fatiha, a prayer that Muslims offer on the occasion of any death, and that their meetings had been humanitarian missions to discuss terms under which the Israeli authorities might release the assailants' bodies for burial.
The Parliament's ethics committee voted late Monday to suspend two of the lawmakers, Hanin Zoabi and Basel Ghattas, from plenary sessions and committee hearings for four months for meeting with the families of attackers whom the Israeli government brands as terrorists. A third Arab lawmaker, Jamal Zahalka, was punished for two months. The lawmakers -- all from the Balad faction, one of the parties occupying the Joint List's 13 seats in the 120-member Parliament -- will still be allowed to participate in votes.
One of their colleagues, Ahmad Tibi, leader of the Arab Movement for Change and a member of Parliament since 1999, denounced the disciplinary action and said the lawmakers had met with the families because the families had no other legal recourse. \"It is just humane, just natural, to listen to them and to transfer their request to the Israel internal security minister,\" Mr. Tibi said in an interview Tuesday.
Mr. Netanyahu, speaking in Parliament on Monday, said, \"We are in favor of the integration of Israel's Arab citizens into society, the economy and the state.\"
In fact, the Israeli government recently announced a roughly $2.5 billion five-year investment plan for Israel's Arab sector, an effort to narrow the gaps between Jewish and Arab citizens. But Mr. Netanyahu added Monday: \"We are not willing to accept a situation in which members of the Knesset support the families of people who murder Israeli citizens. There is a limit.\"
To enforce the limits, Mr. Netanyahu is promoting a contentious bill that would allow members to be banned from Parliament for \"unbecoming conduct\" with a supermajority vote of 90 members.
Mr. Odeh of the Joint List said it was for the Israeli people, not fellow lawmakers, to elect their leaders and decide which ones to remove.
Ms. Zoabi has been suspended from plenary sessions in Parliament before for offending her Jewish colleagues, including in 2014, for a period of six months, after the ethics committee received numerous complaints against her. She had insisted, among other things, that the Palestinians who kidnapped and murdered three Israeli teenagers in the West Bank that year were not terrorists.
This month, Ms. Zoabi was fined and given a six-month suspended prison sentence for insulting Arab Israeli police officers, whom she accused of being traitors.
Ms. Zoabi lashed out on Tuesday against the latest actions in Parliament. \"There is a racist atmosphere; there is even a fascist atmosphere that empties democracy of its content,\" she told Israel Radio. \"Already, I have to ask right-wing Knesset members if they will let me deal with things that are in the public interest, and now I have to ask them if I can deal with humanitarian issues?\"
She added that the meetings with the families of the Palestinian assailants had been \"an issue of sensitivity for the dead.\"
Eyal Ben-Reuven -- a member of the ethics committee from the center-left Zionist Union, which leads the parliamentary opposition -- supported the suspension of the Balad legislators, describing the visits to the Palestinian families as a \"very grave\" act.
But on Israel Radio, he criticized the bill that Mr. Netanyahu is promoting to allow the expulsion of members of Parliament, saying, \"Instead of fighting terrorism, Mr. Netanyahu is fighting democracy.\"
Referring to the Arab minority, Mr. Ben-Reuven added, \"They are citizens of Israel, whether you want them or not.\"
Credit: ISABEL KERSHNER; Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York.
Photograph
From Left, the Israeli Arab Politicians Jamal Zahalka, Ayman Odeh, Ahmad Tibi and Masud Ghanayem in 2015. Mr. Zahalka Was One of Three Arab Lawmakers Censured Monday. (Photograph by Uriel Sinai for the New York Times)
Word count: 957
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 10, 2016"
