"Donald Trump complained Sunday that the Obama administration announces in advance when and where it will attack the Islamic State, giving the enemy an advantage it shouldn't have.
\"We have announcements coming out of Washington and coming out of Iraq: We will be attacking Mosul in three weeks or four weeks,\" the Republican candidate said at the presidential debate. \"Why can't they do the attack? Make it a sneak attack, and after the attack is made, inform the American public that we've knocked out the leaders, we've had a tremendous success.\"
It's true that the element of surprise is an important principle in warfare, something military strategist Sun Tzu pointed out more than 2,000 years ago.
\"We don't do anything that is a surprise,\" said Sebastian Gorka, a national security professor at the Institute of World Politics, who agrees with Trump's criticism. \"We announce everything, down to the smallest detail.\"
Recently, the White House announced the deployment of an additional 615 troops to Iraq to support an offensive on Mosul.
Has the administration ignored the principle of surprise?
Not really. Surprise can take many forms on the battlefield.
Trump is right that the Pentagon has signaled that the northern city is the next major battle in the fight to push militants out of Iraq. They've made that clear for months.
Publicizing an offensive, while withholding critical details, can serve a purpose. Civilians have time to prepare, and fighters in the city might turn against Islamic State rulers.
\"There could be a good military reason for it,\" said Michael O'Hanlon, an analyst at Brookings Institution.
He said Trump's comments have triggered an important debate. \"We've been a little too transparent and a little too vocal\" in talking about the timing of the Mosul offensive.
Still, it's nearly impossible to achieve the kind of surprise the Japanese pulled off at Pearl Harbor in 1941 when planning for a major ground offensive.
The USA and its allies have battled the Islamic State for the past couple of years, and predicting the next step is not difficult. Iraqi security forces have recaptured Ramadi, Fallujah, Tikrit and most other cities that the Islamic State occupied.
The Islamic State views Mosul as its most important stronghold in Iraq. \"You can't sneak up to someone's capital city,\" said Michael Knights, an analyst at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, a think-tank.
The offensive could last months and involve thousands of troops. There's no way to keep that buildup secret.
Without that large buildup in forces, ousting the militants from Mosul would be a major risk.
Credit: Jim Michaels, @jimmichaels, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Jack Gruber, USA TODAY
Word count: 476
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
