"Before adjourning for the summer, lawmakers in Congress found time to pass several bills that could imperil one of the most significant global security achievements in many years: the year-old nuclear deal that President Obama struck with Iran.
This is not the first time that hard-line Republicans and their well-funded lobby group allies have tried to sabotage the deal, struck by Iran, the United States and five other major powers and guaranteeing a lifting of international sanctions in return for strict limits on Iran's nuclear program. So far, both sides have complied with their commitments. Iran's efforts to produce a nuclear weapon have come to a halt and scare talk about a new regional war has disappeared.
That encouraging track record, however, seemed to matter little when the House of Representatives voted to prevent the Boeing Company from selling 80 passenger planes and leasing 29 others to Iran Air, the national airline, at a cost of at least $20 billion.
The deal could be one of the agreement's most significant economic outcomes. It would mark the largest American business transaction with Iran since the 1979 Islamic Revolution ended diplomatic relations between the two nations. It would also provide a much-needed political boost for Iran's president, Hassan Rouhani, whose constituents are disillusioned that the deal's promised economic benefits have not so far materialized. Because of years of sanctions, Iran's commercial airline fleet is so decrepit and unsafe that many people fear flying on the planes.
Republicans in Congress have argued that Iran has a long record as a state sponsor of terrorism and could use the new aircraft to support President Bashar al-Assad of Syria or Hezbollah militants in Lebanon or even reconfigure the planes for military purposes. It is also possible that Iran Air could provide some of the planes to Mahan Air, an airline that remains under sanctions.
There are reasons for concerns, given Iran Air's past practice of ferrying fighters and weapons across the Middle East. But the planes and engines all have unique identifying numbers, and American officials are confident that they and Boeing can track the planes. Should Iran Air misuse any aircraft, they insist, the rest of the order will be withheld, as will spare parts, which are vital to keeping the fleet in the air. Vigilant monitoring, obviously, is crucial.
More broadly, officials believe, an Iran that now finds itself free of nuclear-related sanctions and able to engage more fully in the international economy will be reluctant to act in a way that will provoke a reimposition of sanctions. It can also be argued that once Iran obtains the planes, Mr. Rouhani and other more moderate elements will be in a stronger position to defend the deal and push back against hard-liners in Tehran who, like hard-liners in Washington, are working to make it fail.
It's quite true that Iran's behavior on other fronts -- its recent indictment of an Iranian-American businessman, Siamak Namazi, and ballistic missile tests are two examples -- makes it hard for many Americans to believe that there could be a positive new future for the two countries. Nevertheless, the nuclear deal has proved its value by halting a dangerous and destabilizing nuclear program. The United States has a responsibility to make it work.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
Credit: THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Word count: 580
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 21, 2016"
