"Civilians in besieged Syrian cities are still starving. Though two humanitarian convoys reached Madaya on Thursday, for example, they were the first to do so in months, and the United Nations says five more people there have died from starvation in the past week.
That raises the question: If supplies cannot get through on the ground, couldn't the American-led coalition simply airdrop food into the besieged towns?
The answer, according to American officials, is that it is a lot harder than it sounds.
\"Airdropping doesn't seem to be a smart way to provide food or humanitarian relief in this particular situation,\" said Representative Eliot L. Engel of New York, the ranking Democrat on the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
\"We want to do all we can to help the Syrian people suffering at the hands of ISIS and the Assad regime,\" Mr. Engel wrote in an email, referring to the Islamic State military group and the Syrian military under President Bashar al-Assad. \"But the logistical roadblocks would make this sort of assistance rather perilous.\"
Among the hurdles he mentioned are \"the danger Assad's forces would pose to American military assets, the potential damage airdropped materials could inflict onto those most in need of help and the possibility of aid getting into the hands of terrorists.\"
Mr. Assad's forces have antiaircraft weapons, and the towns most in need of aid, including Madaya, are surrounded by the Syrian military and its allies, including the Hezbollah militia from Lebanon.
The antigovernment rebels and the Islamic State, on the other hand, have few if any such weapons, so the Syrian government and its main ally, Russia, are able to use airdrops to provide food to civilians in towns surrounded by them. They did so last week: The government delivered aid to towns in Idlib Province, according to Amnesty International, and the Kremlin released video images of a Russian military cargo plane dropping pallets of food on Deir al-Zour, which is besieged by Islamic State fighters.
American warplanes regularly strike Islamic State targets in Syria -- there were 34 airstrikes last week, according to the United States Central Command. And in October, American C-17 transport aircraft accompanied by fighter jets dropped 45 tons of weapons and ammunition to rebel forces fighting the Islamic State in Hassakeh Province, according to the Pentagon.
The United States Agency for International Development, an arm of the State Department, said humanitarian airdrops were very different from deliveries of weapons. Humanitarian airdrops in a concentrated area like a besieged town would pose great hazards to the people they were meant to help, the people trapped in the town. They should therefore be used sparingly, Benjamin Edwards, a spokesman for the agency, said in a statement.
\"Airdrops are generally the last resort for humanitarian aid delivery, and should only be considered when other safer, more efficient and effective means are unavailable,\" Mr. Edwards said. \"Airdrops require staff on the ground to create large, visible drop zones, receive the supplies and organize the distribution, so that relief items are distributed according to need. Without proper controls, airdrops can lead to further insecurity, and vulnerable groups may not have access to the aid they need.\"
For these reasons, Britain's Royal Air Force has refrained from trying to airdrop aid in Syria, though it did deliver supplies by air to Yazidis trapped by Islamic State fighters on Mount Sinjar in Iraq last year.
The discrepancy prompted David Blair, a columnist for The Telegraph, a newspaper, to note that \"Madaya is only six miles from Syria's western border with Lebanon -- or about 40 seconds' flying time for a Hercules transport aircraft.\"
\"Is it really beyond the ability of the R.A.F. to penetrate hostile airspace for a round trip of 80 seconds?\" he asked.
The United States \"is the single largest donor of humanitarian aid to the Syrian people, providing more than $4.5 billion to date,\" said Mr. Edwards, the State Department spokesman.
Adding to Western reluctance to drop aid is a complicated diplomatic dance occurring in the skies above Syria. The United States must negotiate legal questions of when it can violate Syria's airspace, and strategic questions about how sorties that do not directly target the Islamic State may rattle the Russians.
\"It's a policy question, not a military question,\" said a Democratic Foreign Relations staff member briefed on the subject but not authorized to speak to reporters. \"We could airdrop aid but chose not to.\"
The United Nations estimates that more than 400,000 Syrian civilians are cut off from access to food supplies. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon calls the denial of food to the civilians a war crime.
According to the World Food Program, more than two million tons of aid have been delivered by airdrops over the past 20 years to areas cut off by emergencies.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Word count: 830
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 20, 2016"
