"The Justice Department has appointed Kenneth R. Feinberg, the lawyer who administered compensation for victims of the Sept. 11 attacks, as special master to oversee a new fund to compensate victims of state-sponsored terrorism.
The fund, created by Congress late last year, will provide compensation to victims of attacks like the bombings of American embassies in East Africa in 1998 and the bombings of the American Embassy and Marine Corps barracks in Lebanon in the early 1980s. It is also intended to compensate the Americans taken hostage at the United States Embassy in Tehran in 1979.
The Justice Department on Tuesday informed lawyers representing some victims of these attacks that Mr. Feinberg, who also handled claims related to the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, had been selected as special master. And it noted the importance of the post, which carries \"unreviewable authority to issue awards from the fund.\"
The fund presents some unusual complications because it covers victims who in some cases have already been designated to receive compensation in various federal court rulings, as well as the Tehran Embassy hostages, who were long barred from seeking court-ordered damages from Iran because of the terms of the treaty that freed them in 1981.
An additional complication is a lawsuit filed by the central bank of Iran seeking to overturn a law in which Congress designated that $2 billion in frozen Iranian assets should be available to compensate victims of terrorism. The Supreme Court heard oral arguments in that case earlier this year, and a ruling is due this spring.
The Justice Department said it expected Mr. Feinberg to take up the role after completion of a routine background check.
In announcing his selection, Anne Pings, a lawyer in the Office of Legislative Affairs at the Justice Department, noted Mr. Feinberg's long experience \"as a special master or claims administrator in a variety of contexts, including for the multibillion dollar claims process arising from the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.\"
Lawyers for victims applauded the news.
\"Ken Feinberg is a very talented, experienced and well-respected lawyer and special master,\" said James G. Flood, the chairman of the government affairs group at Crowell & Moring, a Washington law firm whose clients include victims of the embassy bombings in East Africa.
Steven Perles, a lawyer for many victims of terrorism and their families, who played a crucial role in convincing Congress to take up legislation on their behalf, said, \"By experience and temperament, Ken Feinberg is the perfect special master.\"
Mr. Feinberg, who is also overseeing compensation claims for Volkswagen in its controversy over fraudulent emissions data, agreed to take the special master role on a pro bono basis. \"I'm honored by the assignment,\" Mr. Feinberg said in a brief interview. \"I'll need time to educate myself on the legislation.\"
As in the case of Sept. 11 victims, Mr. Feinberg said he would reach out to eligible claimants for their feedback as the process unfolded.
The selection of Mr. Feinberg, a trusted figure, suggested that the Justice Department was aiming to put to rest any concerns in the Republican-controlled Congress over the handling of compensation claims.
Skepticism about the Justice Department had led lawmakers to designate for compensation of terror victims part of the record $8.9 billion penalty paid by the French bank BNP Paribas when it pleaded guilty to doing business with countries the United States had put under sanction. The legislation effectively curtailed the discretion of the Justice Department in the handling of those funds by mandating the appointment of a special master.
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter .
Photograph
Kenneth R. Feinberg in His Office in Washington Last March. He Will Issue Awards to Victims of State-Sponsored Terrorism. (Photograph by Drew Angerer for the New York Times)
Word count: 671
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 31, 2016"
