"Although the Senate voted Thursday to allow further consideration of bipartisan legislation banning gun sales to people on the no-fly list, it is not clear it has enough support to pass.
Earlier in the day, House Democrats ended their sit-in on the floor of the House of Representatives after more than 24 hours of chants and speeches advocating for stricter gun control measures.
Senate Republicans could have killed the legislation, but several sided with Democrats in allowing it to go forward. Fifty-two senators voted to keep considering the bill, but it will ultimately need 60 votes to be adopted.
To reach the threshold, supporters could set their sights on picking up the backing of Sens. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., and Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif, outspoken advocates for a no-fly-no-buy ban who didn't vote Thursday. But they would then have to flip six Republicans who voted to kill the legislation, a daunting task.
Still, Democrats declared victory in simply keeping the compromise -- crafted by Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, and a handful of colleagues from both parties -- alive for another chance. \"We won the vote, Collins won that vote,\" Democratic leader Harry Reid of Nevada said, adding that the National Rifle Association \"lost this one.\"
He called on Republican leaders to allow another vote to actually try and pass the proposal. \"It's the right thing for the country,\" Reid said.
The measure would ban sales to roughly 109,000 people, including 2,700 Americans, who are on two lists: The no-fly list, which prevents them from boarding commercial planes flying to, from or over the United States; and a \"selectee list,\" which mandates they receive extra scrutiny at airports before flying.
The measure, proposed as an amendment to a spending bill funding the Justice Department, would allow individuals denied firearms to appeal in court. It would also mandate notification of law enforcement if someone who was on broader terrorism watch lists within the past five years tries to buy a gun.
In the House, Democrats vowed to continue their efforts when the House reconvenes after its July Fourth break. Democratic leaders, meanwhile, said lawmakers will return to their congressional districts and drum up more support.
\"We're going to engage our constituents on this subject and we will not allow this body to ever feel as comfortable as they have felt in the past to silence our voices,\" said South Carolina Rep. James Clyburn, the assistant Democratic leader.
Speaker Paul Ryan excoriated Democrats on Thursday morning for disrupting the business of the House as the sit-in moved into its second day. Ryan told reporters Democrats \"are descending (the House) into chaos -- I don't think this should be a very proud moment for democracy.\"
Ryan forced several quick votes in the pre-dawn hours Thursday over loud Democratic objections. He said he would prefer to have allowed debate on those measures, but Democrats were not interested in real debate.
Credit: Donovan Slack, and Deborah Barfield Berry, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Mark Wilson, Getty Images
Word count: 529
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
