"In 1899, Rudyard Kipling wrote a poem called The White Man's Burden, urging America to bring \"civilization\" to the Philippines. The results were 250,000 deaths, war crimes, and denial of Philippine independence for half a century.
Haven't we learned anything?
U.S. forces occupied Iraq for nine years, until the Iraqis insisted that we leave. The results were more than 600,000 deaths, a cost of $4 trillion (8% of our national net worth), and a Sunni vacuum that the Islamic State terror group has filled.
Haven't we learned anything?
I've been to every country in the world recognized by the United Nations. There are a few universals. Everywhere, people want to fall in love; they love children and pets; they're acquisitive.
And everywhere, people don't want to see foreigners with guns. They'd prefer a local dictatorship to a foreign military occupation. So please don't tell me that sending U.S. troops back to Iraq would be \"for their own good.\"
Some argue that we must send U.S. troops to Mosul for our sake, regardless of what the Iraqis want or need. That's called \"colonialism.\" It pits us against one of the great narratives of our times, world decolonization. It invites the hatred not only of more than 1 billion Muslims but the entire world. They will see us not as liberators but as the enemy.
It is a bizarre misconception to think that sending U.S. troops 8,000 miles from home somehow makes us safer. It doesn't. And it is a great disservice to our troops to fight in a place where they don't understand the language, the religion or the customs.
As a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, I asked 10 nearby Sunni Muslim countries whether they would send ground forces to fight ISIL. Four said yes. Then I asked Secretary of State John Kerry whether he had asked the same question. He said no.
If Iraq actually is a thing, then it should be capable of defending itself. If it can't or won't, then fighters who look and sound like locals should do the job.
It isn't the white man's burden. It never was.
Rep. Alan Grayson, D-Fla., is a member of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs.
Word count: 391
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
