"WASHINGTON -- Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter said Tuesday that the United States faced a \"dramatically different\" security environment than at any point in the past 25 years, arguing for an increase in military spending to confront an array of threats like the Islamic State and Russia.
Unlike in previous years when the United States could focus on one major threat at a time, like the Soviet Union or Al Qaeda, the country no longer has the \"luxury of just one opponent, or the choice between current fights and future fights -- we have to do both,\" Mr. Carter said.
\"Now we have to think and do a lot of different things about a lot of different challenges,\" Mr. Carter said in a speech at the Economic Club of Washington, where he provided a preview of the Pentagon's 2017 budget request.
The administration is expected to formally unveil the budget next week. It will call for $582.7 billion in military spending -- roughly half of the government's discretionary spending.
The budget will include a proposal to double the spending on the military campaign against the Islamic State, Mr. Carter said. American forces have conducted so many strikes on the group, he said, that the military is running out of smart bombs and rockets, and needs to invest $1.8 billion in 2017 to buy 45,000 more.
Mr. Carter described Russia and China as the \"most stressing competitors\" as they develop military systems that threaten the United States' traditional advantage.
Those efforts, coupled with Russia's aggression in Ukraine and China's in the South China Sea, have led the Defense Department to elevate \"their importance in our defense planning and budgeting.\"
The budget also proposes a significant increase in spending to enhance the military's footprint in Europe to protect NATO allies of the United States from Russia. The administration will ask for $3.4 billion -- compared with $789 million in the current budget -- for \"more training and exercises with our allies, more pre-positioned warfighting gear and infrastructure improvements to support it.\"
\"And when combined with U.S. forces already in and assigned to Europe, all of this together by the end of 2017 will let us rapidly form a highly capable combined-arms ground force that can respond theaterwide if necessary,\" Mr. Carter said.
\"We must demonstrate to potential foes that if they start a war, we have the capability to win,\" Mr. Carter said. \"Because a force that can deter conflict must show that it can dominate a conflict.\"
Follow the New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter .
Photograph
Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter, at the Economic Club of Washington On Tuesday, Said Spending Needed to Double to Fight the Islamic State. (Photograph by Saul Loeb/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
Word count: 493
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 3, 2016"
