"BRUSSELS -- Salah Abdeslam, the man believed to be a direct participant in the November attacks in Paris who was arrested on Friday, was planning to \"restart something\" in Brussels, Belgium's foreign minister said on Sunday.
At a German Marshall Fund forum here, Didier Reynders, the deputy prime minister and foreign affairs minister, said Mr. Abdeslam had told investigators that \"he was ready to restart something in Brussels.\"
\"It is maybe the reality because, as I said, we have found a lot of weapons, a lot of heavy weapons, in the first investigations,\" Mr. Reynders said. \"And we have seen a new network of people around him in Brussels.\"
Mr. Reynders also said the number of people thought to have been directly or indirectly involved in the Nov. 13 attacks continued to expand, both in Belgium and in France.
\"We are sure that for the moment we have found more than 30 people involved in the terrorist attacks in Paris, but we are sure there are others,\" he said.
In addition to the assailants who died on the night of the attacks, 18 people who are suspected of assisting the attackers are detained in six countries, and at least two others are still at large.
François Molins, the Paris prosecutor, said on Saturday that Mr. Abdeslam had told Belgian investigators that he wanted to detonate a suicide vest at the national soccer stadium near Paris on the night of the attacks, but that he \"backed out.\"
It is still unclear whether investigators believe the comments attributed to Mr. Abdeslam. Mr. Molins said that Mr. Abdeslam's initial statements needed to be treated cautiously and that the investigation would continue.
On Nov. 13, a team of Islamic State assailants carried out bombings and shootings in Paris and its northern suburb of St.-Denis, killing 130 people and wounding hundreds at a concert hall, in cafes and restaurants, and at the stadium, the Stade de France.
Mr. Abdeslam, who is thought to be the only surviving member of that team, played a \"key role\" in the preparation and logistics of the attacks, Mr. Molins said, but his exact actions on the night of Nov. 13 are unclear.
Mr. Abdeslam was arrested Friday in the Molenbeek section of Brussels, the Belgian capital, after an international manhunt that had lasted four months. He was charged with terrorist activities and participation in terrorist murder and is detained in a high-security prison in the northern Belgian town of Bruges.
Mr. Abdeslam is being questioned by Belgian investigators, but is wanted for trial in France. Sven Mary, Mr. Abdeslam's Belgian lawyer, has said his client would fight his extradition to France, a tactic that is expected to delay, but not block, the process.
Mr. Mary also told the Belgian public broadcaster RTBF on Sunday that he intended to file a complaint against the Paris prosecutor for a violation of judicial secrecy laws, because he had revealed comments made by Mr. Abdeslam to Belgian investigators.
Credit: AURELIEN BREEDEN; Steven Erlanger contributed reporting.
Word count: 513
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 21, 2016"
