"BERLIN -- As Irmela Mensah-Schramm descended from the train in Buch, a combustive locality in the north of Berlin that is a fault line in the refugee crisis, her agitation was visible. The last time the 70-year-old with snow-white hair was there, a local neo-Nazi shoved her roughly. Now, she says, she will not even venture into town, for fear that someone will recognize her and alert the thug.
Not to worry, though; there was plenty for this retired teacher to do at the station. In a passageway, half a dozen innocuous-looking green and white stickers featured, upon closer inspection, the sword-and-hammer symbol of a virulent neo-Nazi group. During lulls in foot traffic, Ms. Mensah-Schramm, who is well- known in Germany for her dogged campaign to remove neo-Nazi messages from public places, quickly went to work with a scraper.
While shakily clambering under a hand rail, Ms. Mensah-Schramm tore down a neo-Nazi poster declaring that \"we\" would never celebrate the end of World War II. She also made short work of a hand-drawn, fist-size swastika with a bottle of nail polish remover she keeps at the ready. Safely back on the train, she tallied the number of symbols erased -- about 30 in all -- in her spiral notebook. \"That brings me up to 72,354 over the years,\" she said with a sense of rueful satisfaction. \"It's pretty heavy.\"
For the last three decades, and starting long before the current uproar over the stream of refugees that is invigorating the German far right, Ms. Mensah-Schramm has spent her free time -- lately, several days a week -- roaming the streets of Berlin, where she lives, as well as other cities and towns throughout the country. Toting a canvas bag with the handwritten message \"Against Nazis,\" she checks train stations, condom machines, cigarette dispensers, playgrounds, lampposts and alleyways in search of banned Nazi symbols, anti-immigrant catchphrases and political stickers. The offending items often lurk among \"refugees welcome\" notes, soccer club adhesives and the odd stick-on circus ad -- often with encoded slogans like \"We want to live\" or \"Punish child abusers to the utmost extent\" and with web addresses for shadowy groups from the radical right.
When she finds something objectionable, which she says she nearly always does, she might take a photograph, peel a sticker off for her files or simply note the discovery, along with the date and place. Then she gets rid of it, either by scraping away the offending sticker or, in the case of graffiti, erasing or simply painting over it. \"I have a strong appreciation for human dignity,\" said Ms. Mensah-Schramm. \"When I see someone's dignity being hurt, I feel it myself.\"
Over the years, she has accumulated what might be the most extensive collection of radical-right stickers and graffiti in Germany. \"She's got more than any state archive,\" said Isabel Enzenbach, who curated an exhibit at the German Historical Museum, featuring Ms. Mensah-Schramm's 80-odd binders of material, that traces the lengthy German tradition of plastering walls with messages of hate, as well as longer, funnier and more thoughtful counterarguments.
Noting that anti-Semitic, Nazi-era stickers are considered harbingers of violence, Ms. Enzenbach -- whose exhibit also displays a replica of Ms. Mensah-Schramm's homemade \"Against Nazis\" canvas bag, along with nail polish remover, stove scraper and spray paint can -- called Ms. Mensah-Schramm a role model for helping to enact social change.
\"She's a little obsessive,\" said Ms. Enzenbach. \"But all collectors are.\"
Ms. Mensah-Schramm agreed that documentation is important. However, she says her first priority is to remove symbols of hate that can hurt vulnerable groups. \"It follows me in my sleep,\" she said. \"I don't think I could stop if I wanted to. If I see something, I have to take it down.\"
Ms. Mensah-Schramm was born in Stuttgart in 1945. What she, like others of her generation, learned about the Nazi era was fragmentary. \"At home, the principle was, 'It's better not to talk about it,\"' she said. As a young woman, she grew apart from her family, and found southwestern Germany too conservative for her taste. After moving to Berlin in 1969, she taught children with severe disabilities and became involved in the antinuclear movement.
Ms. Mensah-Schramm said she reached a turning point in the early 1980s when she visited a concentration camp for the first time. When she came home, she vomited, but also resolved to make the same journey every year to commemorate the dead. She said that a few years later, in 1986, she was shocked to see a sticker at her bus stop that demanded the release of Rudolf Hess, the imprisoned Nazi war criminal. The sticker bothered her all day at work. When she came home that evening, it was still there. \"No one had taken it off,\" she said.
She used her keychain to scrape it away, and felt better. A few days later, she said she spent an entire night walking the streets of her comfortable Berlin neighborhood and was astounded by the scores of inconspicuous far-right messages she found. \"After a few weeks, the stickers stopped coming back,\" she said. \"It shows the neo-Nazis that someone doesn't agree with them.\"
Ms. Mensah-Schramm's activities do carry some risks. Over her 30 years of scraping, dissolving and painting over far-right slogans, she estimates she has been assaulted three or four times. But, she said, she has also been hugged by strangers and thanked.
Then there are the potential legal ramifications: \"She's walking a thin line, if you look at German laws regarding graffiti and property damage,\" said Martin Gegenheimer, coordinator of a graffiti archive in Berlin. \"She's gotten in trouble a few times. But her position is that, morally, it's more important to get rid of this stuff.\"
As tensions rise over the refugee issue in Germany, others are following her lead. Last year, Ibo Omari, owner of a Berlin shop that sells graffiti paint and related items, founded an organization that has sponsored artists to convert some 20 swastikas into street art: Rubik's Cubes, mosquitoes and owls. \"She's the grandmother of this project,\" Mr. Omari, whose video of rehabilitated symbols has gone viral, said of Ms. Mensah-Schramm. \"She's way more experienced than we are. She's not digitally connected like we are, but she should have been supported years ago.\"
Still, thanks to workshops and classroom visits, Ms. Mensah-Schramm does reach young people. \"She is taking responsibility for society,\" said Julia Reidl, an English and geography teacher at the Goethe-Gymnasium in Karlsruhe. Ms. Reidl's sixth, seventh and 11th graders have redrawn copies of real-life graffiti that says \"I love Hitler\" to offer more positive messages, like \"I love cats,\" in workshops with Ms. Mensah-Schramm. \"They totally get into it,\" said Ms. Reidl. \"Some of the little ones said, 'We want to go out and help you!' It's so important, especially nowadays, with all this hatred against refugees and Islam.\"
Following a tumble down a flight of stairs at a train station, Ms. Mensah-Schramm said she has modified her activities. \"I have to acknowledge my boundaries,\" she said. She can only carry so much paint, no longer climbs structures if she is alone, and sometimes takes a day off.
Still, on this day she has enough energy for one more stop. In neighboring Bernau, she spotted graffiti on a telephone booth urging people to slug in the mouth those who oppose the radical right wingers.
As Ms. Mensah-Schramm scrubbed, a resident, Ingrid Bramke, 80, expressed her approval from her spot on a nearby bench. \"It's definitely good she is doing this,\" she said. \"We really don't want any Nazi slogans here.\"
Photograph
Irmela Mensah-Schramm
Word count: 1297
Copyright New York Times Company May 28, 2016"
