"If recent history is a guide, the latest terrorist attack in Brussels, while a terrible human tragedy, won't scare stock investors into selling or keep the stock market down for long.
The impact of terror attacks on financial markets has become less dramatic and far more muted in recent years, compared with the massive sell-off after the Sept. 11 attacks in 2001, when the broad U.S. stock market tumbled nearly 5% in the first trading day after the attack and was down nearly 12% five trading days after planes hijacked by terrorists brought down the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York.
Indeed, as terror attacks become more commonplace, their shock value has diminished. A list of terrorist-related events since 1979 shows that the stock market impact from terrorist events fades within 10 days, according to data from Bill Stone, chief investment strategist at PNC Asset Management Group.
\"Economies and markets tend to adjust and become desensitized to terror attacks over time,\" Stone says. \"The fact remains that the impact of terror attacks on the market has always faded over time.\"
David Kotok, chief investment officer at Cumberland Advisors, agrees each successive attack has less psychological effect on investors. \"Shocks work like this: The first one is a surprise and (gets) a big response,\" he says. \"The next one, less so. And so it goes.\"
Terror events normally are not on a scale that can create massive downside risk for the economy, says Jim Paulsen, chief investment strategist at Wells Capital Management.
\"The market appropriately prices each event,\" Paulsen says. \"There have now been several examples, and it is becoming clear that these events are typically temporary and minor as far as their impact on future economic, business and earnings growth.\"
While the frequency of terror attacks has picked up in recent months, with three highly publicized attacks occurring since November, the reaction of the stock market has been decidedly ho-hum as investors put these tragic events into perspective.
Data compiled by USA TODAY show stocks often shrug off the terrorist act altogether. After the Boston Marathon bombings in March 2013, the Standard & Poor's 500 index, which plunged 2.3% on the day of the attack, was close to break-even 10 trading days later. Similarly, following last year's attacks in Paris at the offices of magazine Charlie Hebdo and the more recent attack in November at the Bataclan theater and outdoor Parisian cafes, the U.S. stock market finished in positive territory the day of the attacks as well as in the five-, 10- and 30-trading day periods after.
Tuesday, Wall Street shrugged off the latest attack, with the S&P 500 down less than 0.1%.
It would take a terror strike of much larger proportions and shock value to spook investors and cause a major downdraft, Wall Street pros say.
The latest strike in Europe, however, could impact markets negatively in different ways, says Barry Bannister, chief equity strategist at Stifel. It could exacerbate political risks and create headwinds related to free trade and immigration, as well as spark a backlash against globalization, he warns. It could exacerbate so-called \"Brexit\" fears, as England weighs whether to leave the European Union, experts say.
\"The only market read-through is how it affects politics in the U.S. and Europe,\" Bannister says.
Credit: Adam Shell, @adamshell, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo OLIVIER HOSLET, EPA
Word count: 593
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
