"Excerpts from Donald Trump's national security speech Monday in Manchester, N.H.:
This is a very dark moment in America's history. A radical Islamic terrorist targeted the (Pulse) nightclub, not only because he wanted to kill Americans, but in order to execute gay and lesbian citizens, because of their sexual orientation.
We need to respond to this attack on America as one united people, with force, purpose and determination. But the current politically correct response cripples our ability to talk and to think and act clearly. We're not acting clearly, we're not talking clearly, we've got problems.
If we don't get tough, and if we don't get smart, and fast, we're not going to have our country anymore. There will be nothing, absolutely nothing, left.
The bottom line is that the only reason the killer was in America in the first place, was because we allowed his family to come here (from Afghanistan).
That is a fact, and it's a fact we need to talk about. We have a dysfunctional immigration system, which does not permit us to know who we let into our country, and it does not permit us to protect our citizens properly. We have an incompetent administration.
With 50 people dead, and perhaps more ultimately, and dozens more wounded, we cannot afford to talk around issues anymore. We have to address these issues head-on. I called for a ban (on Muslim immigration) after San Bernardino and was met with great scorn but many are saying that I was right to do so. And although the pause is temporary we must find out what is going on. We have to do it.
It will be lifted -- this ban -- when and as a nation we're in a position to properly and perfectly screen these people coming into our country. They're pouring in and we don't know what we're doing. The immigration laws of the United States give the president powers to suspend entry into the country of any class of persons.
I will use this power to protect the American people. When I'm elected I will suspend immigration from areas of the world where there's a proven history of terrorism against the United States, Europe or our allies until we fully understand how to end these threats.
Word count: 399
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
