"Isis is an ancient Egyptian goddess of the moon, fertility, healing and magic. She is known as the essence of femininity and is exalted in her role as mother and wife. The regal name Isis also means \"woman of the throne,\" and thousands of women and girls around the world claim this name.
My husband and I named our 3-year-old daughter Isis because we wanted her name to reflect her heritage. But she has become one of the many unacknowledged, unanticipated casualties in the war against the Islamic State terrorist group: children and adults who bear a name equated with perhaps the most heinous terrorist group of our time.
It's common to hear phrases such as \"Stop ISIS\" or \"ISIS attacks\" on the news. There's even a billboard in Phoenix that blares, \"Hey ISIS, you suck!!! From: #ActualMuslims.\"
\"ISIS\" was around long before it was used as the acronym for the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria. Notable women named Isis include American actress Isis Carmen Jones, Brazilian Actress Isis Valverde, Kenyan-American technology leader Isis Nyong'o and British astronomer Isis Pogson. There are also organizations, geographical landmarks, scientific discoveries, computer programs, fictional characters and song titles that share the name.
As the terror group has risen, the name has fallen off the charts in the USA. In 2013, Isis was the 575th most popular American name for girls, according to the Social Security Administration. In 2014, it was the 705th. Last year, it wasn't in the top 1,000.
Although scholars, politicians and activists have argued against using the term and have suggested alternatives such as Daesh, some news outlets are almost relentless. A CNN anchor recently interviewed a political expert on using the term. The guest consistently used ISIL -- Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (a larger area than Syria) -- but the CNN anchor kept on reverting to ISIS.
It is evident to many that the term is the least accurate label for the terrorist group. News organizations might be using it for consistency. Politicians may prefer it because it elicits the most fear.
The effect is that people with the name suffer. Seventh-grader Isis Brown of Tulsa was bullied so incessantly that she switched schools. Nutella refused to print the names of at least two girls on its jar as part of the corporation's Your Nutella Your Way campaign: Isis Redbanks, 6, of Toronto and Isis Taylor, 5, of Australia.
Adults have also felt the sting. Isis Martinez of Florida accidentally used a wrong number to text a friend and received, \"You f---ing terrorist.\" She has started an online petition for the news media to stop calling the terrorist group ISIS. It has received more than 65,000 signatures.
I dread the day that my daughter will come home crying because someone has called her a terrorist. Sadly, the name we were so proud to give our daughter has unjustly and inaccurately become a symbol of terror.
Germine Awad, an associate professor in the Department of Educational Psychology at the University of Texas-Austin, is a Public Voices Fellow with The OpEd Project.
Word count: 536
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
