"Twitter said it has suspended 235,000 accounts for violating policies on the promotion of extremism and terrorism over the past six months, bringing the overall number of suspended accounts to 360,000 in the last year.
The company also has expanded the teams that review reports of misuse of the networking service, which had become a go-to tool for some terror and extremist groups looking to get their message out.
Twitter said daily suspensions are up more than 80% since last year and that such suspensions jump just after terrorist attacks, when presumably extremists wish to tout their success.
After the terror attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, Calif., the Obama administration and presidential candidates had criticized social media platforms for not doing more to police extremist groups.
In February, Twitter said it had suspended 125,000 accounts connected to the Islamic State in the past six months.
In a blog post Thursday Twitter said it is working to disrupt extremists' ability to quickly create replacement accounts by expanding the teams that review reports of behavior that violates its terms and agreements. These teams work 24 hours a day, the company said.
To fight terrorist groups, the company said it has been using some of its own spam-fighting tools, allowing it to reduce the amount of time these users exist on Twitter and the number of followers they gain.
In part because of pressure from Twitter, much of the messaging and propaganda from Islamic extremists has moved from Twitter to other platforms, such as the encrypted messaging service Telegram, said Veryan Khan, editorial director with the Terrorism Research and Analysis Consortium, a private firm that collects information on terrorism.
Separately, Twitter rolled out new tools aimed at reducing harassment, an endemic problem that's contributed to stagnant user growth. A quality filter will allow any user to hide tweets that appear automated. And it will let users choose to limit their notifications to only those from people they follow.
Credit: Elizabeth Weise, @eweise, USA TODAY
Word count: 351
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
