"Shortly after the deadliest mass shooting in U.S. history, the Supreme Court refused Monday to hear a challenge to assault weapons bans passed in Connecticut and New York after the Newtown elementary school massacre of 2012.
The challenges were denied without comment from the court. Last December -- five days after a terrorist attack killed 14 people in San Bernardino, Calif. -- the justices refused to hear a challenge to a Chicago suburb's ban on such semiautomatic weapons.
The Connecticut law was signed by Democratic Gov. Dannel Malloy in April 2013, four months after 20 students and six educators were gunned down at Sandy Hook Elementary School. Expanding on an earlier assault weapons ban in the state, it banned more than 100 types of firearms, along with magazines that can hold more than 10 rounds of ammunition.
Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo signed a similar ban in New York that created a registry of assault weapons in the state, banned their sale and blocked the sale of high-capacity magazines.
Assault weapons bans are in place in five other states: California, New Jersey, Massachusetts, Maryland and Hawaii. The federal government had such a ban for 10 years, but it expired in 2004. Ever since, Congress has defeated proposed bans, most recently in 2013.
Since its landmark 2008 decision upholding the right to possess guns at home for self-defense, the Supreme Court has refused to strike down lesser state and municipal restrictions. Those include bans on carrying guns in public, requiring them to be disabled or locked when not in use, limiting ownership by those under age 21 and restricting interstate gun transfers.
In March, the court said Massachusetts probably went too far in banning non-lethal stun guns. The justices did not strike down the ban, but they unanimously reversed a state court ruling upholding it and ordered a rehearing.
Federal courts have ruled that statutes such as Connecticut's and the one in Highland Park, Ill., are not at odds with the Supreme Court's rulings in 2008 and 2010 permitting handguns to be kept at home for self-defense.
Credit: Richard Wolf, @richardjwolf, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Getty Images/iStockphoto
Word count: 382
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
