"The driver of a large white truck mowed down a crowd gathered to watch Bastille Day fireworks in Nice, France, on Thursday night. Scores of people were killed and injured in what the French president called a terrorist attack.
What We Know
The truck, a 19-ton refrigeration vehicle rented by the assailant on July 11, sped down the crowded seaside promenade in Nice around 10:45 p.m. Thursday, said François Molins, the Paris prosecutor. He said the assailant drove about 1.1 miles and exchanged gunfire with three police officers. He was found shot to death in the truck cab's passenger seat.
At least 84 people were killed -- including 10 children and teenagers -- and 202 were wounded, government officials said on Friday. President François Hollande of France said that at least 50 of the injured had been critically hurt. Foreigners among the dead included three Germans, two Americans, two Tunisians and a Russian.
Government officials identified the assailant as Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, 31, a delivery-truck driver raised in northeast Tunisia, who moved to France around 2005. He had a minor criminal record for threats, violence, theft and vandalism, Mr. Molins said, but his name was not in a government database of radicalized militants.
Contrary to initial reports from Nice municipal officials that the truck was full of weapons and explosives, Mr. Molins said its cargo hold contained a bicycle and eight empty pallets. He said the cab contained an automatic 7.65-millimeter pistol, two fake assault rifles, a nonfunctioning grenade, and a cellphone and unspecified documents that the police were analyzing.
Mr. Hollande called the truck killings a terrorist attack and convened an emergency meeting at the Interior Ministry in Paris. He said that a state of emergency established after the Paris attacks eight months ago would be extended by an additional three months. It had been scheduled to expire on July 26.
France will observe three days of national mourning, starting on Saturday, Prime Minister Manuel Valls announced Friday morning. He said that the country would not give in to terrorism, but he warned that it had entered an era in which it would have to live with terrorism.
What We Don't Know
The motive for the attack, whether the truck driver had accomplices, or whether any radical Islamist organizations may have played a role.
The extent and adequacy of security preparations for the large crowds attending Bastille Day celebrations on Thursday, especially in cities outside Paris, like Nice. There was extensive security in place for the recent Euro 2016 soccer tournament.
Whether France's intelligence and security agencies had received any hints of the danger. On July 5, a parliamentary inquiry examining last year's attacks found widespread failures in the collection and analysis of information that could have helped prevent those assaults.
Credit: THE NEW YORK TIMES
Word count: 478
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 16, 2016"
