"WASHINGTON -- The shooting rampage at a nightclub in Orlando, Fla., has focused new attention on the vast but murky terror watch lists that the government has used with mixed results to identify potential security threats.
At the time of the terror attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, there were just 16 names on the government's so-called no-fly list. Today, that number stands at about 81,000, officials said, and the largest of the watch lists has 1.5 million names on it, all but a small fraction of them foreigners.
One of the names on the F.B.I.'s terrorism watch list as of early 2014 was Omar Mateen, the shooter in the Orlando attack. But when the F.B.I. dropped its investigation into his suspected terrorist sympathies, his name came off the list, and he was legally allowed to go into a Florida gun store this month and buy a semiautomatic assault rifle used in the killings.
That sequence of events has set off a round of debate in Congress over the law allowing someone on the list to buy a gun. But four bills aimed at plugging the \"terror gap\" and blocking people on terrorism watch lists from buying guns failed to gain passage this week.
Another proposal, led by Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, and Senator Heidi Heitkamp, Democrat of North Dakota, appeared likely to meet the same fate as early as Thursday.
>
From 2005 to 2015, nearly 2,500 people who appeared on the F.B.I.'s terrorism watch list attempted to buy a firearm, and 91 percent of the sales were approved, a study by the Government Accountability Office found.
The recent proposals to stop people on the watch lists from being able to buy guns have faced resistance from an unlikely group of opponents, including the National Rifle Association and the American Civil Liberties Union.
\"We're as appalled as anyone else about the attack in Orlando,\" said Hina Shamsi, the director of the A.C.L.U.'s National Security Project. \"But it's our position that there is no bar on Congress in the reasonable regulation of guns. They could do something without an overly broad, unreliable watch list solution.\"
The A.C.L.U., representing Muslim-Americans and others who said they had wrongly been put on the no-fly list, won a ruling in federal court in Oregon two years ago that found the list was unconstitutional because of the high risk of errors and the difficulty of being taken off it. That lawsuit is continuing.
\"There certainly has been some improvement in the process since these watch lists were first put into place, but we still don't think the safeguards are adequate,\" Ms. Shamsi said.
Under guidelines for the biggest of the terror lists, known as TIDE, or Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment, those placed on the list are \"known or appropriately suspected\" of being involved in terrorist activity. Of the 1.5 million names on the TIDE list, residents of the United States account for only about 15,000.
In one of the most recent internal reviews of the watch list system, the Justice Department inspector general found in a 2014 report that improvements in the F.B.I.'s watch list system had made it \"more complete, accurate and current\" after problems in getting people on and off the list.
Earlier reviews found that as many as 15 percent of suspects in active terrorism investigations were not on the F.B.I. watch list, and that other people were improperly kept on it even after investigations into their suspected terrorism ties were closed. Both these problems appeared to have been significantly reduced or eliminated by the time of the 2014 review.
Counterterrorism officials have described the watch lists as a cornerstone of their efforts to detect possible terrorists before they can strike. But the watch lists' effectiveness has been spotty.
Just as Mr. Mateen was put on a watch list before the Orlando shooting, Tamerlan Tsarnaev -- one of the brothers in the Boston Marathon bombings in 2013 -- had also been placed on several versions of the list a few years earlier.
The \"underwear bomber,\" Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, who tried to detonate a bomb on a Detroit-bound plane in 2009, was also on one version of the terrorism watch list but was allowed to board the plane in Amsterdam. That near-disaster led to wide changes in the system and an expansion of the lists.
But the very next year, Faisal Shahzad, who tried to detonate a car bomb in Times Square in Manhattan, was allowed to board a plane for Dubai a day after the attempted bombing even though he had been put on a no-fly list. He was apprehended while the plane was at the gate.
In the wake of the Orlando shootings, Justice Department officials said they were considering a new policy to alert F.B.I. investigators if someone who was once on a terrorism watch list, like Mr. Mateen, attempts to buy a gun.
By itself, the placement on a watch list would not be grounds to stop a firearms purchase. But F.B.I. investigators could then search the buyer's file to look for other legal prohibitions -- like a criminal conviction, drug use or mental health issue -- that could allow them to stop the sale.
Credit: ERIC LICHTBLAU; David M. Herszenhorn and Emmarie Huetteman contributed reporting.
Word count: 889
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 23, 2016"
