"LOS ANGELES -- Autopsies of the 14 people killed in the San Bernardino, Calif., terrorist attack last year confirm that all died quickly after being shot at least twice, but the reports also reveal details of the carnage.
San Bernardino County released the heavily redacted autopsies on Friday as part of a public records request by The Associated Press.
The Dec. 2 attack, which also left 22 injured, targeted San Bernardino County public health workers attending an annual training event in a large conference room that had been decorated for Christmas. Dressed in black and wearing ski masks, one of their co-workers, Syed Rizwan Farook, and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, opened fire on the group. The couple were killed in a shootout with the police later that day.
The autopsies of the attackers were not released Friday. A county spokesman, David Wert, said the investigation into their deaths had not been finished.
The victims' autopsies detail the chaos inside the 85-foot-by-40-foot conference room.
The body of Harry Bowman, 46, was found nearest the room's northernmost door. Mr. Bowman, a father of two daughters who had recently been hired by the county, was shot five times.
Eight other bodies were found in the conference room, as far as more than 50 feet from where Mr. Bowman lay.
Three victims, all men, were found clustered near a Christmas tree.
\"The room was in disarray,\" the autopsy reports said. \"The chairs, food, property and decorations were strewn about the room. There were several dozen cartridge casings around the room. There were multiple bullet holes in the ceiling, walls, furniture and floor.\"
Some of the ceiling tiles had come crashing down, the autopsies said.
Three victims died just outside the building, and two others were pronounced dead at a triage station set up nearby.
It is unclear how long the two victims who were taken to the triage station, Shannon Johnson, 45, and Bennetta Bet-Badal, 46, lived before they were pronounced dead.
Mr. Johnson's autopsy shows that he died of a gunshot wound to the right thigh, though he also was hit in the back, elbow and buttocks. One of his co-workers has credited Mr. Johnson with saving her life, saying that when the bullets began flying, he held her close and told her, \"I got you.\"
Ms. Bet-Badal, a native of Iran who came to the United States when she was 18 to escape the persecution of Christians, died of a gunshot wound to the abdomen, her autopsy said. She had also been hit in the legs and the chest.
The San Bernardino assault was the deadliest terrorist attack in the United States since Sept. 11, 2001. The F.B.I. said the attackers had become radicalized before they met online and had communicated privately about jihad and martyrdom before they married.
Credit: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Word count: 482
Copyright New York Times Company May 29, 2016"
