"WASHINGTON -- Congressional leaders on Friday voiced dismay and outrage over the killings of police officers in Dallas and called on the American people to unify, and members of the Congressional Black Caucus, while echoing the grief and calls for healing, also demanded that Republicans allow votes to tighten the nation's gun laws.
\"We come to this place each week to represent our constituents who are in pain,\" said Representative G.K. Butterfield, Democrat of North Carolina and the chairman of the caucus. \"As of June 30, just a few days ago, 491 Americans have been fatally shot by the police; most of those were African-American.\"
Mr. Butterfield added, \"Last night, despicable crimes were committed against Dallas police officers, and when the dust settled five of them were dead as a result of an organized execution by criminals who possess guns and use them to the extreme. And so the Congressional Black Caucus convenes today to say to America we are continuing our fight to remove guns from the hands of terrorists and would-be criminals.\"
Democrats, including the 45-member Black Caucus, have been pushing Republicans to schedule votes on gun control proposals even though those measures are sure to be defeated and similar proposals have already failed in the Senate. They include an effort to block gun sales to individuals on the government's no-fly list, and a strengthening of mandatory background checks for gun buyers.
\"Republicans, what on Earth are you, why are you recoiling and not giving us a debate on gun violence?\" Mr. Butterfield said. \"Why are you recoiling and not giving us a debate on gun violence? Why not give it a hearing, give us a debate, give us an up-or-down vote on our legislation on gun violence? Why?\"
In a floor speech, Speaker Paul D. Ryan expressed dismay at the recent violence, called for healing and cautioned against further division.
\"Every member of this body -- every Republican and every Democrat -- wants to see less gun violence,\" Mr. Ryan said. \"Every member of this body wants a world in which people feel safe regardless of the color of their skin. That's not how people are feeling these days.\"
Mr. Ryan continued, \"Sometimes we disagree passionately on how to get there, but in having this debate let's not lose sight of the values that unite us. Let's not lose sight in our common humanity. The values that brought those protesters to the streets in Dallas, the values that brought those protesters to the streets in Washington last night.\"
He added, \"Respect. Decency. Compassion. Humanity. If we lose those fundamental things, what's left?\"
Mr. Ryan, however, did not immediately suggest any legislative response.
Other members of the Black Caucus said they hoped to pursue legislation that would encourage communities to adopt voluntary performance standards for police officers, as well as legislation that would provide additional federal financing and other support for training law enforcement officers.
Representative John Lewis, Democrat of Georgia, who led an all-night sit-in on the House floor on June 22 to demand votes on the gun control legislation, urged peaceful protest, in the tradition of the Civil Rights movement of which he was a leader.
\"There's no room in our society for violence; we respect law enforcement,\" Mr. Lewis said. But he added, \"There needs to be greater training of law enforcement and sometimes I feel that maybe not only those of us that engage in nonviolent protest but police officers need to be taught the way of peace, the way of love, the way of nonviolence, to respect the dignity and the worth of every human being.\"
He said, \"It doesn't matter whether black or white, Latino, Asian-American or Native American; we are one family living in one house. We must learn to live together as brothers and sisters. If not, we will perish as fools. We have too many guns. There has been too much violence. And we must act.\"
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.
Photograph
Congressional Black Caucus Members Stood Friday to Condemn the Shootings in Dallas and Demand Gun Control From Congress. (Photograph by Michael Reynolds/European Pressphoto Agency)
Word count: 724
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 9, 2016"
