"Security in New York City, already at full throttle in anticipation of the United Nations General Assembly this week, ratcheted up to the highest level Monday after the bombing Saturday in Chelsea and the discovery of explosives planted elsewhere in New York and New Jersey.
The heightened security will be \"probably the largest security presence ever amassed,\" Gov. Andrew Cuomo told NY1 on Monday. New York's massive police force, about 34,500 uniformed officers, will be bolstered by 1,000 state police and National Guard members, who will patrol bus terminals, airports and subway stations, along with more FBI agents and city police, Cuomo said.
New Yorkers will see more \"heavily trained officers and heavily armed officers\" on the streets and in the subways, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Monday. The city increased its anti-terror force by 500 people last year.
\"You will see bags being checked, bomb-sniffing dogs,\" he said.
Though the arrest Monday of suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami, 28, in Linden, N.J., gave some sense of relief, New York City Police Commissioner James O'Neill said his department wouldn't let up.
\"We always have to be in a state of alert in New York City,\" he said. \"We are the No. 1 target in the world.\"
Jeh Johnson, secretary of Homeland Security, had already declared the gathering of U.N. leaders a \"national special security event,\" which brings with it thousands of extra department officers led by the Secret Service.
The Secret Service arrived heavily armed and declared itself ready.
Private entities also opted for extra security measures. Steve Osman, CEO of Metropolitan Pacific Properties, which manages buildings within blocks of the United Nations that serve as consulates for 22 countries, including Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Bahrain, said his company doubled security for round-the-clock surveillance. He said the countries often hire former FBI or city police officers to guard their floors.
Osman urged consulates not to issue visas for the week to avoid having strangers in the neighborhood. His teams check for packages left on the sidewalk or even a sewer grate left slightly ajar.
\"You're going to have to be a little more sophisticated in New York and (New) Jersey because we're looking for everything -- we're expecting it,\" Osman said. \"This is not going to be the last of it.\"
Among the heads of state in town this week to discuss the world's refugee situation and other matters are Premier Li Keqiang of China and Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq and President Obama.
\"Our counterterrorism and law enforcement officials at every level -- federal, state and local -- are working together around the clock to prevent attacks and to keep us safe,\" Obama said Monday.
Obama said conversations with Cuomo, de Blasio and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie reinforced the resilience of residents.
\"One point they all made is that folks around here, they don't get scared. They're tough, they're resilient,\" Obama said. \"That kind of toughness and resoluteness, and the recognition that neither individuals nor organizations like ISIL (the Islamic State) can ultimately undermine our way of life -- that's the kind of strength that makes me so proud to be an American.\"
Contributing: Jon Campbell, Albany correspondent for USA TODAY Network
Credit: Bart Jansen, @ganjansen, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Mary Altaffer, AP
Word count: 580
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
