"PARIS -- The Belgian government announced police and intelligence changes on Friday intended to address criticism of its failure to properly monitor or arrest the Islamic State-inspired extremists who used the country to plot the Nov. 13 attacks in Paris.
Three of the Paris attackers, including the suspected ringleader, Abdelhamid Abaaoud, were residents of the immigrant district of Molenbeek in the capital, Brussels. At least one of the attackers, Salah Abdeslam, remains at large, having eluded Belgian authorities after re-entering the country, which remains on high alert.
The evident failures of Belgium's police and intelligence service set off intense soul-searching about how to overcome the linguistic and political barriers to more coherent and effective policing in the country, famously divided among French, Dutch and German speakers.
Flemish politicians in the north of the country have been most vocal in blaming divisions and bad cooperation among the policing zones for the lack of law and order in Brussels' poorer neighborhoods.
The plan announced Friday, after weeks of back-room haggling, mostly skirts any streamlining of bureaucratic redundancies or ways to better share intelligence across agencies and regions divided by linguistic rivalries.
Instead, it will double spending -- to about $446 million -- on the police, intelligence and justice departments, as well as add 1,000 officers by 2019 in the area known as the canal zone, which includes Molenbeek.
About 300 of those officers will supplement local police forces this year to help fight terrorism and crack down on illegal trafficking in arms, drugs and false passports, tasks once mostly the domain of federal agencies. The additional officers will also be used to tighten border controls, especially at international airports.
Yet the plan's emphasis on policing and monitoring largely immigrant areas has already made many uncomfortable.
Under the plan, the justice department will be allowed to closely scrutinize mosques not officially recognized by the government, which often take the shape of nonprofit organizations. Mosques can then be shut down in case of fiscal or other irregularities, officials said.
\"The goal is to detect and pick out jihadi fighters and possible terrorists in Molenbeek and the canal zone,\" said Interior Minister Jan Jambon. \"We want to know who is staying in Molenbeek.\"
The day after the Nov. 13 terrorist attacks, which killed 130 people, Mr. Jambon said on national television that he would put together a plan to \"clean up Molenbeek\" and proposed carrying out a census in the poorest areas of Brussels by \"going door to door and seeing who actually lives there.\"
The proposition by Mr. Jambon -- a Flemish nationalist -- was quickly denounced by several French-speaking mayors of Brussels (which has 19 mayors) and denounced by the local authorities, who said it would stigmatize Muslims in those areas even more.
\"The Muslim community in the canal zone is 300 percent against this sort of radicalism,\" said Johan Berckmans, chief commissioner of the policing zone responsible for Molenbeek.
\"Only a few people are involved in radicalist activity and we have to uncover their networks,\" he added, \"but by doing a population census and intruding in their homes we will stigmatize the whole of the community and lose their confidence in our police corps.\"
Pieter Van Ostaeyen, a Belgian historian and expert on terrorism, acknowledged that there was a problem in the poor neighborhoods of the bigger cities in the country, such as Brussels, Antwerp, Verviers and Charleroi, but that the link between those problems and terrorism was unclear.
\"The main problem is that terrorists can move freely across borders inside Europe and that intelligence on these individuals can't,\" Mr. Van Ostaeyen said.
Word count: 613
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 6, 2016"
