"A report by a news agency linked to the Islamic State claimed on Sunday that a \"soldier of the Islamic State\" was behind a stabbing attack on Saturday night at a Minnesota shopping mall, an episode that the F.B.I. said it was investigating as a \"potential act of terrorism.\" Nine people were injured in the attack before an off-duty police officer fatally shot the knife-wielding man, the authorities in St. Cloud said.
The attacker, who was dressed in a security guard uniform, mentioned Allah and asked at least one victim if he was Muslim, the police said. All nine victims were expected to survive.
The Islamic State on Sunday claimed responsibility for the episode, but it was unclear whether the attacker, whom the police have not identified, was in fact acting in the name of the terror group. The Amaq News Agency, which acts as the Islamic State's newswire, released a bulletin saying the \"executor of the stabbing attacks in #Minnesota yesterday was a soldier of the Islamic State.\"
The terror group's bulletin went on to say the attack was a response to the group's call to \"target citizens of countries belonging to the crusader coalition,\" a term referring to the United States-led coalition carrying out airstrikes against the group. The language of the bulletin -- down to the reference to the perpetrator as a soldier of the Islamic State -- mirrors claims of responsibility the group issued for numerous attacks in recent weeks.
This summer, a spokesman for the Islamic State, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, advised his followers overseas to carry out jihad at home. He said that it was no longer necessary to join the group in Iraq and Syria, and that aspiring jihadists should instead use whatever means they had to kill.
Chief William Blair Anderson of the St. Cloud police told reporters at the scene, \"It has hit home for us,\" adding, \"But I want everybody in St. Cloud to know that we will be diligent and we will get to the bottom of this.\"
\"It's an awful day, honestly,\" Chief Anderson said.
In a phone interview on Sunday morning, Mayor Dave Kleis said the mall, Crossroads Center, was an active crime scene and would remain closed. He praised the off-duty police officer, who he said had \"clearly saved lives and protected the other individuals.\"
\"This is exactly what keeps me up at night, and last night it did,\" Mr. Kleis said. \"This could happen in any community in this country, and certainly we have seen it happen. Certainly it is something that really scares a community.\"
Later Sunday, Mr. Kleis identified the off-duty officer as Jason Falconer, a police officer in nearby Avon, Minn. Mr. Kleis said video footage of the shooting, which has not been released publicly, showed Officer Falconer confronting the attacker in a Macy's store and shooting him as he charged with a knife.
\"For me watching it, it looked like a training video for what law enforcement should do,\" Mr. Kleis said.
The mayor said the wounded included seven men, one woman and a teenage girl, all from the St. Cloud area.
Mr. Kleis called the attack an \"evil act, unjustifiable in any way.\"
The disruption to a carefree night of shopping in central Minnesota occurred on the same day that 29 people in New York City were injured in an explosion and that an explosive device detonated near the route of a race in New Jersey. The authorities on Sunday night were becoming convinced that the New York and New Jersey episodes were connected, but have given no indication of a link to the stabbing in St. Cloud.
Chief Anderson said officers had searched two local residences on Sunday in connection with the case. He said the police had had at least three prior interactions with the attacker, mostly for minor traffic violations.
Richard Thornton, the special agent in charge for the F.B.I. in Minneapolis, said the agency was treating it as a potential terrorist act but was still investigating.
\"There's a lot we don't know,\" Mr. Thornton said. \"We do not at this point in time know whether the subject was in contact with, had connections with, was inspired by a foreign terrorist organization.\"
Chief Anderson said the attack had started around 8 p.m. and played out at different sites within Crossroads Center, including multiple businesses and common areas. Mr. Kleis, who went to Crossroads Center after the attack, said that \"there were a lot of people in that mall and clearly a lot of witnesses,\" and that police interviews had stretched well into Sunday morning.
Witnesses and local journalists spoke of a busy, crowded and confusing scene after the attack, as well as a swift police mobilization.
PHOTO: From inside the food court entrance. Authorities are not letting anyone out. pic.twitter.com/5TQKfILv2t -- Lyanne Valdez (@UTVSLyanne) September 18, 2016
\"One guy was bleeding from the side of his face,\" Sydney Weires, a college student who was inside the mall, told The St. Cloud Times. \"He was screaming at us\" to get out.
Harley Exsted, another mall patron, told The St. Cloud Times, \"All of a sudden I heard pop pop pop.\"
\"I thought someone tipped over a shelf,\" he said. \"All of a sudden these people started running. I just saw everybody running our way.\"
Group of shoppers huddled near food court entrance, waiting to be allowed to leave mall by police. pic.twitter.com/9Yq7oOJvmx -- Steve Tellier KSTP (@stellierkstp) September 18, 2016
St. Cloud, a city of about 67,000 residents, is about an hour's drive northwest of Minneapolis. \"Starting tomorrow,\" Chief Anderson said after the attack, \"things won't be the same here.\"
Follow Mitch Smith on Twitter: @MitchKSmith. For breaking news and in-depth reporting, follow @NYTNational on Twitter.
Credit: MITCH SMITH; Rukmini Callimachi and Matt Furber contributed reporting.
Photograph
Mayor Dave Kleis of St. Cloud, Minn., Left, and the City's Police Chief, William Blair Anderson, Held a News Conference Early Sunday. (Photograph by Dave Schwarz/St. Cloud Times, Via Associated Press)
Word count: 1019
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 19, 2016"
