"It was Christmas evening when Abdulrahman Ince, 23, spotted government tanks on a hill in the embattled southeastern Turkish town of Cizre.
Ince, his father, mother, brother and sister-in-law, who was holding her 3-month-old infant, were creeping to the basement when they heard the crack of a sniper's rifle and noticed blood running down the baby's cheek.
In the next frantic moments, Ince recalled, the Kurdish family telephoned the police, begging them to hold their fire so they could make their way to a waiting ambulance near the house. Waving a white flag as they crawled to the ambulance, they came under fire again, Ince said in a phone interview. Another bullet struck the infant, killing her instantly. Ince's 80-year-old father was also shot and died at the scene.
The two victims are among a growing death toll as a 3-week-old Turkish government offensive tries to eradicate Kurdish separatist militants aligned with the outlawed Kurdistan Worker's Party (PKK) in the southeast provinces of Cizre, Silopi and Sur. The majority Kurdish region has been turned into a war zone, shattering hopes for a peace deal and raising fears the country may slide into civil war.
At least 200 militants and 175 civilians have been killed since the government siege of tank and artillery fire began Dec. 14, according to local officials and human rights groups such as Human Rights Watch.
As the fighting continues and a 24-hour curfew is in place, the Ince family has been unable to bury the dead. The infant's body has been stored in a freezer, and Ince's father's body was transferred to a morgue in Cizre.
SCENES OF CARNAGE
The area is off-limits to journalists, but residents reached by phone described scenes of carnage.
Videos and images shared on social media show tanks firing into residential neighborhoods and pockmarked buildings.
Residents said the round-the-clock curfew has left them low on food and water, and they are afraid to leave their basements because of the tanks and snipers surrounding them.
\"There is no electricity. We are using diesel generators to charge our cellphones,\" said Mahmut Sen, 31, an electrical worker who said his wife was killed last week by a sniper as she tried to use an outdoor toilet in Cizre.
\"They are shooting anything that moves,\" Sen said. \"Food is unreachable. One man lost his arm after being shot while trying to open a water valve to bring some water to the people.\"
Turkey has been alarmed by gains Kurdish militants have made in the civil war in neighboring Syria, which have emboldened calls for Kurdish self-rule in Turkey, something the government vowed to resist.
The government has waged a campaign against PKK rebels since the collapse of a tentative cease-fire deal in July. It had ended a four-decades-long conflict that killed about 40,000 people.
Tit-for-tat killings continued for months until a landslide win for President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's ruling AKP Party in parliamentary elections in October, when the government stepped up its offensive against the Kurdish cities.
The militants responded by digging trenches and erecting barricades to fend off government forces in urban centers.
Erdogan vowed to \"cleanse\" the areas, telling a crowd of people in Konya on Dec. 17, \"(Militants) will be annihilated in those houses, those buildings, those ditches which you have dug.\"
Erdogan accused Selahattin Demirtas, leader of the pro-Kurdish People's Democratic Party (HDP), of treason for comments he made in support of Kurdish autonomy.
The Kurdish party gained representation in Parliament in the elections in October.
Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu has accused the HDP of being an arm of the PKK, which is listed as a terrorist organization by Turkey, the United States and European Union.
POTENTIAL FOR CIVIL WAR
HDP spokesman Ayhan Bilgin accused the Erdogan government of trying to criminalize the party and derail peace talks.
\"They are trying to make the idea of autonomy illegal,\" he said. \"We are now reaching the upper threshold of violence. If it spreads to the west, it will be civil war.\"
Human rights groups said civilians bear the brunt of the violence.
\"Our research shows the state is using lethal force in an indiscriminate and disproportionate way,\" said Emma Sinclair-Webb, senior Turkey researcher at Human Rights Watch in Ankara. \"To use tank fire in heavily populated areas goes well beyond any normal counterterrorism operation.\"
Aaron Stein, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council, a Washington think-tank, said he sees little prospect for an end to the fighting soon.
\"The government has been very clear: They will not resume the peace process until the PKK withdraws and disarms,\" Stein said. \"The PKK does not appear amenable to this demand.\"
For civilians stuck inside the area, hopes for a return to political negotiations are dimming. \"Enough is enough,\" Ince said. \"We just want peace.\"
Credit: Lauren Williams, and Oral Gerek, Special for USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Photos by ILYAS AKENGIN, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 866
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
