"SAN FRANCISCO FBI Director James Comey chose the moment well for his gambit to make law enforcement easier by trying to compel Apple to weaken a key feature of its most important product.
Linking the government's legal effort to the probe of the San Bernardino, Calif., terrorist shootings is an effective way to remind everyone that the main job of law enforcement is keeping people safe.
Subsequent polls show the percentage of Americans who think Apple CEO Tim Cook should resist the FBI's request is much lower than those who have a favorable view of Apple's brand.
The sentiment underlying those poll numbers shows how risky Cook's strategy is for Apple, its iconic brand and its shareholders.
His defense of Apple's right to build in security features that protect the privacy of iPhone users has won him the support of civil libertarians worried about government overreach.
It should also have the support of the tens of millions of consumers who own Apple products, but only if such privacy concerns are paramount to them.
Legal and constitutional rights can be abstract things to those who've never been arrested, prosecuted or imprisoned.
The desire to not be shot to death in a random terror attack is, on the other hand, a survival instinct shared by all humans.
No surprise then if at least some U.S. smartphone users (or perhaps most) are among those concerned more about security than privacy.
By tying the FBI's legal move to the still-fresh memory of the San Bernardino shootings, the FBI has a better chance of framing Apple's refusal as dangerous to public safety.
The problem with curtailing the civil and legal rights of U.S. citizens in exchange for a promise of safety, ultimately, is where to draw the line.
Fortunately for all of us, the people who wrote and ratified the U.S. Constitution came up with a durable framework for balancing safety and privacy.
Forcing federal prosecutors to go to a judge for a warrant is a protection against \"unreasonable\" search and seizure.
That worked well until the 9/11 terrorist attacks and the government's mass surveillance programs that came in their wake shifted the notion of what is reasonable.
New technology, including the type of security software developed by Apple, has also challenged legal notions of privacy.
In this new reality, the question of how private your smartphone data should be from government intrusion is an important one.
It's worth having a debate about, and indeed a bi-partisan Congressional committee has invited both Comey and Cook to testify.
If Apple had not fought the order approved by a judge at the FBI's request, this important debate would have been squelched and the federal government would have won a powerful legal precedent by default.
That's why Cook has done a favor for everyone who feels the nation's long-term commitment to civil liberties ultimately keeps us all safer than knee-jerk moves to restrict them.
Yet if the majority of Americans feel differently, Cook's stance has risked alienating some of them as future customers.
If so, rivals like Microsoft whose co-founder Bill Gates said this week he supported the government's position, only to backtrack on his comments stand to benefit at Apple's expense.
Donald Trump, the leading contender for the Republican presidential nomination, has already called for an Apple boycott.
If such sentiment takes hold, Cook's stance could end up costing Apple and its business in the court of public opinion, even if the company's argument ultimately prevails in a court of law.
Word count: 617
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
