"KABUL, Afghanistan -- The United Nations mission in Afghanistan on Thursday condemned an American airstrike it said had killed at least 15 civilians in eastern Afghanistan, a day after American and Afghan officials said they had targeted a gathering of Islamic State affiliates.
Information about the strike, which occurred early on Wednesday morning in the Islamic State stronghold of Achin district, in Nangarhar Province, has been contradictory, with the remoteness of the area making reports hard to verify.
Groups of fighters claiming allegiance to the Islamic State have been gaining ground in small pockets of eastern Afghanistan since 2015, drawing attention from Afghan and coalition operations. Although the extent of the militants' contact with the Islamic State group in Iraq and Syria remains unclear, they have nevertheless caused havoc in the area with brutal methods.
From the onset of Wednesday's strike, which the United Nations statement said was carried out by a remotely piloted drone, local elders said the victims were civilians. But even as a United States military spokesman said the military was investigating reports of civilian casualties, Afghan officials late into Wednesday night insisted the victims of the strike were members of the Islamic State.
A delegation sent by the governor of Nangarhar Province returned with its findings late on Wednesday, saying 18 of those killed were Islamic State fighters, including a major commander and judge. There were five civilian casualties, the delegation said in a statement. It did not detail how many were dead and how many were wounded.
The United Nations, although acknowledging government reports that Islamic State fighters were among the victims, said most of those killed were civilians.
\"The civilians had gathered in a village to celebrate the return of a tribal elder from the hajj pilgrimage to Mecca and were reportedly sleeping in a guesthouse of the elder when the airstrike occurred,\" the United Nations statement said. \"Civilian victims of the strike included students and a teacher, as well as members of families considered to be pro-government.\"
Brig. Gen. Charles Cleveland, a spokesman for the United States military in Afghanistan, said American officials were aware of the United Nations statement but stood by the insistence that the military had been targeting Islamic State militants.
He added: \"We continue to work with Afghan authorities to determine if there is cause for additional investigation.\"
Credit: MUJIB MASHAL; Khalid Alokozay contributed reporting from Jalalabad, Afghanistan.
Word count: 410
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 30, 2016"
