"Celebrating last week's victory by Iraqi government forces over the Islamic State terrorist group still feels a little premature. Yes, retaking the provincial capital Ramadi, the largest city to be recaptured so far, was some of the best news yet out of a region where the news has been awful.
And it's tempting to conclude from the months-long battle that America's Iraqi allies have turned the corner after seeming hopelessly overmatched by ISIL forces that drove them out of Ramadi in the first place. U.S. officials insist a year's training has given Iraqi troops new skills and a will to fight ISIL, also known as ISIS.
If that's true, and if the Iraqis can replicate this success in tougher tests to come in Fallujah and Mosul, it could vindicate President Obama's insistence on letting local forces take the lead while U.S. forces stick largely to training and assistance.
After years of fighting by Americans in Afghanistan and Iraq, Obama has been understandably reluctant to put more U.S. boots on the ground. If American allies in Iraq and Syria can beat ISIL with the help of U.S. training and air power, that would be vastly preferable to proposals to deploy as many as 20,000 troops, as called for by Sens. John McCain, R-Ariz., and Lindsey Graham, R-S.C.
As promising as Ramadi seems, though, the news since Iraq's government said it had retaken the city on Dec. 28 includes reason for caution. There were reports of counterattacks as recently as Sunday, and ISIL appears to still hold some neighborhoods.
After-battle accounts also noted that it took 10,000 Iraqi troops to dislodge just 500 to 1,000 ISIL fighters from the center of the city, an ominous sign for the coming battle to retake Mosul, which Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi promised would happen this year. Iraq's second largest city is home to thousands more ISIL fighters than Ramadi, and as many as 1.5 million civilians, while Ramadi's peak population was about 400,000. Refugees from fighting in the city said ISIL forces were using families as human shields. In Mosul, ISIL will have many more shields.
But politics could be more important than military might. If the Iraqis can't temper the internal struggle between Sunnis and Shiites, sectarian strife could undermine military victories. There have been promising signs the Shiite-majority government gets that. Commanders tried to keep Iraq's powerful Shiite militias away from the fighting while relying on Sunni forces to occupy Sunni-majority Ramadi.
At the same time, though, the Shiite-led government has been reluctant to help arm some Sunni groups to fight the common enemy, and there's little sign that al-Abadi's government has reopened the political space for Sunnis that was shut down by his Shiite predecessor Nouri al-Maliki, oppression that helped create an opening in Iraq for ISIL's Sunni extremists in the first place.
Even if Iraqis could pull together, any detente could be threatened by outside forces, such as the growing friction between Sunni-led Saudi Arabia and Shiite-led Iran.
Americans should be heartened by the apparent victory in Ramadi, but it will take years to finish the job.
Illustration
photo AP
Word count: 549
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
