"It's no secret. The media have portrayed the Middle Eastern community as terrorists and villains for decades. On the positive end, occasionally we might be depicted as a belly dancer or a used car salesman, but it's never much more than that. It's certainly very rare for a Middle Easterner to be front and center on a television show, as Joelle \"JoJo\" Fletcher will be on the new season of ABC's The Bachelorette.
JoJo was left heartbroken in March when Bachelor Ben Higgins chose Lauren Bushnell to be his future wife. JoJo was then announced as the next Bachelorette, which is set to air Monday. And for those who might not be aware, the new Bachelorette's mother is a member of the largest ethnic group in Iran.
\"My mom is Persian, and my dad was born and raised in Tennessee,\" Fletcher writes in her biography on The Bachelor website. \"I'm proud of my mother's background despite what social opinions are. It's important for me to stand up to people stereotyping Iranians.\"
What we're really like
The show has long been criticized for its lack of diversity. With 31 seasons between The Bachelor and its spinoff The Bachelorette, there has been only one diverse star, American-born Venezuelan Juan Pablo Galavis.
JoJo's selection as the next Bachelorette not only adds ethnic diversity to the lineup, it does something much larger for the Middle Eastern community as a whole. It provides a more positive representation of us to the world.
In the past two decades, the issue of terrorism has thoroughly dominated discourse about the \"Middle East\" in the popular media. That's even more true lately because of the presidential campaign and incidents such as the San Bernardino shooting barely 15 miles from where I work. With racist rhetoric and hate crimes against Muslims and Middle Easterners on the rise, JoJo provides a much needed example to the American public of what most Iranians (and Middle Easterners) living in the USA are really like.
What kind of Middle Easterners am I talking about?
Me, certainly. I was born and raised in Southern California. My parents are Iranian. I grew up speaking English and Farsi. I have made a life for myself between the two cultures, and languages. I have a master's degree. I work. I condemn acts of terrorism. I love a great cup of coffee and checking out new restaurants. I enjoy working out. I read. My friends are Caucasian, African-American, Mexican, Asian (the list goes on); and they are Jews and Christians, atheists and Muslims, believers and doubters.
'Southern sweetheart'
My life is not unique. There are plenty of \"ordinary\" Middle Easterners around the world. But most of the time, these kinds of lives go unnoticed. Fortunately, JoJo could provide a glimpse of what this life looks like.
We, just like most people, are looking for love. We are each searching for our life partner. We deal with insecurities and doubts. We have overprotective brothers, loving mothers, and ex-boyfriends who send us flowers and long letters on the day we are supposed to introduce our new boyfriend to the family. OK, maybe only JoJo had to deal with that, but you get my point. With JoJo being the next Bachelorette, Middle Easterners are being given a new image.
In publicity materials about the show, ABC has called JoJo a \"Southern sweetheart,\" playing up her Texas roots and mentioning that her parents are doctors. I learned more only after I saw JoJo with her parents on TV during the \"hometown dates\" episode of The Bachelor. I thought her mother looked Middle Eastern, so I did a Web search and found the information about her Persian heritage.
The network hasn't said much about JoJo's Iranian background, so I can't speculate that it will be a focus on The Bachelorette. But I can say her casting is a positive and welcome change for a Persian like me.
Mojgan Sherkat, a former television news reporter, is a senior public information officer at the University of California-Riverside. The opinions expressed here are her own.
Illustration
photo Rick Rowell, ABC
Word count: 717
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
