"House Republicans say that despite stonewalling by the Obama administration they were able to conclude a two-year investigation into the 2012 terror attacks in Benghazi with an 800-page report that blames politically motivated bureaucratic delays for failing to prevent or stop the deadly attacks that claimed four American lives.
The highly anticipated report adds new detail to the findings of seven previous congressional inquiries and is expected to be used by Republicans to question Hillary Clinton's leadership as the fall presidential campaign heats up.
Clinton, who was secretary of State when Ambassador Christopher Stevens and three others were killed on Sept. 11, 2012, was planning to visit Libya later that year, which pressured diplomats to stay at the poorly guarded, temporary outpost despite deteriorating security in the region, according to the report.
The Republicans said \"despite President Obama and Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta's clear orders to deploy military assets, nothing was sent to Benghazi, and nothing was en route to Libya at the time the last two Americans were killed almost 8 hours after the attacks began.\"
Republicans highlighted a teleconference meeting a few hours after the attacks began as a turning point in the U.S. response. They say actions taken after that meeting, in which Clinton participated, only delayed the deployment of military forces. Communications afterward referenced the need to get clearance from various countries to deploy military resources for a rescue, according to the GOP report.
Rep. Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., a former prosecutor and chairman of the committee, urged Americans to \"read this report for themselves, look at the evidence we have collected, and reach their own conclusions.\"
\"We expect our government to make every effort to save the lives of Americans who serve in harm's way. That did not happen in Benghazi,\" said Rep. Mike Pompeo, R-Kan., a member of the special committee. \"Politics were put ahead of the lives of Americans, and while the administration had made excuses and blamed the challenges posed by time and distance, the truth is that they did not try.\"
Democrats on the panel, led by Rep. Elijah Cummings, D-Md., have repeatedly accused the Republicans of using the investigation and numerous previous committee probes to try to embarrass Clinton and damage her chances of becoming president. They released their own minority report a day ahead of the Republicans, contending the report absolves Clinton of blame in the terror attacks.
In a statement, Clinton's campaign spokesman Brian Fallon said the House investigation, after spending more than $7 million, did not find anything to contradict the conclusions reached by previous congressional committees.
\"This report just confirms what Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy and even one of Trey Gowdy's own former staffers admitted months ago: This committee's chief goal is to politicize the deaths of four brave Americans in order to try to attack the Obama administration and hurt Hillary Clinton's campaign,\" Fallon said.
Contributing: Paul Singer and Gregory Korte, USA TODAY, and Craig Gilbert, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.
Credit: Mary Troyan, USA TODAY
Word count: 520
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
