"A large car bomb explosion killed at least 34 people and wounded scores more in the Turkish capital of Ankara on Sunday, the governor's office said.
The bomb exploded close to bus stops near a park at Kizilay, Ankara's main square, NTV television reported. The news channel said the explosion occurred as a car slammed into a bus.
Mehmet Muezzinoglu, Turkey's health minister, said 125 people were wounded, 19 of them seriously. He said 30 of the victims died at the scene, while another four perished at hospitals.
The BBC reported that several vehicles at the scene were reduced to burnt-out wrecks, including at least one bus.
No group immediately claimed credit for the attack, the BBC reported. Kurdish militants and the Islamic State group have carried out bombings in the city recently.
Dogan Asik, 28, said he was on a bus when the explosion occurred. \"We were thrown further back into the bus from the force of the explosion,\" said Asik, who was injured on his face and arm.
Police sealed off the area and pushed onlookers back, the Associated Press reported, warning there could be a second bomb. Forensic teams were examining the scene.
Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu was convening an emergency security meeting and President Recep Erdogan, who has been in Istanbul, was briefed on the attack by the interior minister, the newspaper Hurriyet reported.
Erdogan was expected to return to Ankara.
Health ministry officials said 30 people died at the scene and four died en route to the hospital.
The explosion came three weeks after a suicide car bombing in the capital targeted buses carrying military personnel, killing 29 people. A Kurdish militant offshoot of the outlawed Kurdish rebel group the Kurdistan Workers' Party, or PKK, claimed responsibility for that attack.
The Peoples' Democratic Party, or HDP, issued a statement Sunday saying it shares \"the huge pain felt along with our citizens.\"
Credit: Greg Toppo, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Elif Sogut, Getty Images
Word count: 358
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
