"A Syrian refugee blew himself up and wounded 12 people near a music festival in Ansbach, Germany, on Sunday night. Three of the victims suffered grave injuries.
The authorities identified the man behind the blast as a 27-year-old Syrian refugee who was denied asylum last year. He had attempted suicide twice before, and officials had not yet identified a motive for the detonation as of early Monday.
\"We still don't know whether the offender only wanted to commit suicide or whether it was his intention to kill other people as well,\" Joachim Herrmann, the Bavarian interior minister, said at a news conference.
Though the suspect was denied asylum, he was allowed to stay in refugee housing because of the dangerous situation in Syria.
The police said they had been alerted to the detonation just after 10 p.m. The explosive device, they said, was packed with \"small metal parts\" that were found around the location of the blast, near the front entrance of a music festival. The man set off the explosion after being refused entry to the festival, an open-air concert with about 2,500 visitors, officials said.
\"It is only thanks to fortunate circumstances that not more people were killed,\" Mr. Herrmann said. \"We now have to do everything that such violence in our country, by people who had entered it as asylum seekers, does not spread further.\"
The explosion was part of a violent week for Germany. On Friday, nine people were killed by an 18-year-old Iranian-German gunman who then killed himself. That attack had no overt terrorist ties, the authorities said.
Last Monday, a young Afghan refugee wielding an ax and a knife on a passenger train wounded five people in the name of the Islamic State. And earlier on Sunday, a 21-year-old Syrian refugee killed a woman with a machete, an attack officials said they believed was linked to \"relationship troubles.\"
The authorities said it was too soon to ascribe a motive to the Ansbach attack, but at least seven jihadist and pro-Islamic State channels on Telegram, a secure messaging app, promoted images of the explosion.
Credit: NIRAJ CHOKSHI; Reporting was contributed by Victor Homola, Patrick Boehler, Gregor Aisch and Rukmini Callimachi.
Word count: 376
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 25, 2016"
