"CAIRO -- Security forces and supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood exchanged fire outside a hotel in Cairo on Thursday, in a sign of political tensions in advance of the fifth anniversary of the 2011 revolution this month.
The gunfire at the Barceló Cairo Pyramids hotel caused only superficial damage to the front of the building and to a tour bus parked outside, and no injuries were reported. The episode represents another blow to a tourism industry that has been devastated by terrorist attacks and political unrest.
The Islamic State's affiliate in Egypt claimed to have brought down a Russian passenger jet in October, killing 224 people. But the government said that the violence on Thursday stemmed from civil unrest in which tourists had not been directly targeted.
The exchange occurred when about 15 people gathered on a side street and fired homemade flares at security forces stationed outside the hotel, the Interior Ministry said in a statement.
After the guards shot back, someone in the crowd fired a homemade pellet gun at the hotel, breaking a window in the front of the hotel and a window on a bus that was being used by a group of Arab Israeli tourists.
In Tel Aviv, an Israeli Foreign Ministry spokesman said that nobody had been in the bus at the time of the incident, and that no Israelis had been wounded.
Egyptian officials said that one man had been arrested in connection with the shooting and that the security forces were searching for a second suspect.
One Israeli tourist suggested that the events had been more serious than Egyptian officials were portraying, telling The Associated Press that the attackers had also tried to throw fire bombs at the bus.
The Egyptian government has warned against public protest on Jan. 25, the fifth anniversary of the revolution that toppled former President Hosni Mubarak, and the latest episode of unrest comes at a delicate time for the tourism industry, a major source of income for Egypt.
Many here were angry when Western countries issued stern travel advisories after the plane crash in October, adding to a sharp slump in tourism since the revolution in 2011. The Egyptian government has also contributed to the crisis with mistakes of its own, however.
On Wednesday, Foreign Minister Claudia Ruiz Massieu of Mexico told reporters that Egypt had nearly completed an investigation into the deaths in September of six Mexican tourists, who were killed in an airstrike in the Western Desert.
Fighter jets and helicopters attacked the tourists as they were eating lunch, apparently after they were misidentified as Islamist militants. Four Egyptian companions of the tourists were also killed.
The Egyptian authorities said little about the attack at the time other than to promise a full investigation. Ms. Ruiz Massieu said the official Egyptian report was \"nearing completion.\" She added that the initial indications were that Egypt intended to blame the local authorities and the travel agency that organized the trip.
Credit: DECLAN WALSH; Amina Ismail contributed reporting.
Word count: 512
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 8, 2016"
