"Chancellor Angela Merkel said Thursday that Germany will stand by its principles of offering safe haven to migrants and not bow to fears stoked by a series of attacks in one week, including two claimed by the Islamic State.
Cutting short a vacation after her nation's refugee policy came under fire, Merkel vowed to ratchet up security measures. \"Fear can't be a good counsel for political action,\" she said.
She acknowledged the shocking nature of the attacks, including three by refugees seeking asylum in Germany. In the two attacks claimed by the Islamic State, a Syrian refugee blew himself up Sunday in Ansbach, injuring 15 people. On July 18, an Afghan teenager wielding an ax wounded five passengers on a train in Wrzburg.
\"Taboos of civilization are being broken,\" Merkel said, referring to the violence in Germany as well as recent attacks in the U.S., France, Turkey and Belgium.
German authorities said they do not believe Islamic extremism was part of two of the recent attacks -- a mass shooting in Munich that left nine dead before the gunman took his own life, plus the fatal stabbing of a woman at a restaurant in Reutlingen.
The attacks came six months after more than 1,200 women told police they were groped on New Year's Eve in Cologne and other German cities by men described as being of North African and Middle Eastern descent. Those assaults intensified an anti-immigration sentiment among many in Germany.
This month's attacks increased pressure on Merkel's open-door policy toward refugees fleeing war-torn Syria, Iraq and other nations. Merkel said Thursday that her 2015 policy of accepting more than 1 million migrants and refugees still stands. Between 25,000 and 30,000 Syrians have sought asylum in Germany each month this year.
\"I am still convinced today that 'we can do it.' It is our historic duty and this is a historic challenge in times of globalization,\" she said, according to Agence France-Presse.
Credit: Gregg Zoroya, @greggzoroya, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo JOHN MACDOUGALL, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 362
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
