"Speculation that terrorism caused the crash of the EgyptAir flight from Paris to Cairo grew Thursday when both France and Egypt were on high alert because of recent terrorist attacks.
Last Nov. 13, gunmen and suicide bombers killed 130 people and wounded hundreds in coordinated attacks on a concert hall, a soccer stadium and restaurants and cafes in Paris. The month before, 224 people were killed when a plane bound for Moscow was brought down over Egypt's Sinai Peninsula. The Islamic State claimed responsibility for both incidents.
Alain Vidalies, France's transport minister, said Thursday that the presence of three air marshals on EgyptAir Flight MS804 was the \"usual practice.\" But Doug Maclean, a Britain-based aviation expert with a background in air-traffic control, said it would be unusual for there to be more than one air marshal aboard a plane unless authorities were aware of specific security alerts.
\"For each flight, a risk assessment is made for these types of things,\" he said.
Maclean said French security authorities probably determined that a flight to the Middle East on an Egyptian airline from Paris warranted the extra security given recent terrorist attacks in both places.
He said connections between the perpetrators of the Paris attacks and bomber in Brussels in March who killed 32 people would have given authorities in both countries further cause to take heightened security measures.
Authorities searched for debris from the jet in the Mediterranean Sea, and investigators were only beginning to try to determine what caused the crash. Egypt's Civil Aviation Ministry said search-and-rescue teams looked for the missing jet near the Greek island of Crete.
The jet was traveling with 10 crew and 56 passengers, including one child and two infants. EgyptAir listed the nationalities of the passengers as: 30 Egyptians, 15 French, two Iraqis and one each from Sudan, Chad, Portugal, Algeria, Canada, Great Britain, Belgium, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
Greek Defense Minister Panos Kammenos said the Airbus A320 made two sharp turns, then suddenly lost altitude before vanishing from radar 174 miles off the Egyptian coast. \"It turned 90 degrees left and then a 360-degree turn toward the right, dropping from 38,000 to 15,000 feet, and then it was lost at about 10,000 feet,\" he said.
Greek civil aviation authorities said all appeared fine with the flight until air-traffic controllers prepared to hand it over to their Egyptian counterparts. The pilot did not respond to their calls, and the aircraft disappeared from radar.
Egyptian Civil Aviation Minister Sherif Fathi said the possibility of a terror attack as the cause of the crash is \"higher than that of a technical error,\" Egypt's state-run newspaper Al-Ahram reported.
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump, as well as Russian and Egyptian authorities, also speculated that the jet was brought down by terrorists.
In Washington, White House spokesman Josh Earnest said President Obama received \"multiple updates\" on the missing jet from his homeland security and counterterrorism team.
FBI Director James Comey said during a visit to the Chicago field office that U.S. officials didn't have any evidence that confirmed the jet was brought down in a terrorist attack. \"We don't know exactly what this is yet,\" Comey said.
The threat from terrorism is high in Egypt, and though most attacks have targeted the government and its security forces, foreigners have also been attacked.
Britain's foreign office said the most active terrorist group in Egypt is Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, an insurgent group behind a number of deadly attacks in Cairo and the remote Sinai region. Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis pledged allegiance to the Islamic State in 2014.
Thursday's incident came as France's parliament approved a two-month extension of the state of emergency declared after the deadly attacks in Paris.
The measure expands police powers to put people under house arrest and allows authorities to forbid the movement of people and vehicles at specific times and places. The action is aimed at covering a European Championship soccer tournament June 10-July 10 and the Tour de France on July 2-24.
The jet crash followed a recent warning from Patrick Calvar, head of the General Directorate for Internal Security, a French intelligence agency. \"We know that (the Islamic State) is planning new attacks and that France is clearly targeted,\" Calvar told a parliamentary defense committee hearing May 10.
\"We risk being confronted with a new form of attack: a terrorist campaign characterized by leaving explosive devices in places where big crowds gather,\" he said.
Contributing: Doug Stanglin and Jessica Durando
EGYPTAIR FLIGHT DISAPPEARS OVER THE MEDITERRANEAN
Flight 804 dropped from
37,000 feet to 15,000 feet
before vanishing from radar.
Credit: Kim Hjelmgaard, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo KHALED DESOUKI, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 819
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
