"Belgium and Europe came under harsh criticism for weaknesses in their counterterrorism efforts that experts in international security said come as no surprise.
Suicide bombings in Brussels on Tuesday killed more than 30 people, left hundreds wounded and prompted a massive manhunt for suspects. Then came news that a European Council report recently called out Belgium for lax security protocols and that Turkey captured one of the bombers months ago, suspecting him of attempting to enter Syria to join extremists, but Belgium didn't take the case seriously.
Matthew Levitt, a former Treasury Department official specializing in counterterrorism, said Belgian officials are beset by a mammoth task.
\"There are all kinds of cultural and bureaucratic obstacles to overcome,\" said Levitt, who recently spent time with intelligence agencies and police in Brussels as a guest of a military think-tank. \"They are cognizant of the threat, but they are very late to the game. Remember, 9/11 wasn't smooth here at home.\"
About 17,000 Belgian police officers have been trained to identify and combat radicalization in immigrant communities, Levitt said. Teachers and social workers are being integrated into the effort. But the lure of the Islamic State can be strong \"if you are disenfranchised, from a broken home, maybe have a criminal record,\" he said.
Retired general Michael Hayden, a former chief of the National Security Agency and the CIA, said communication breakdowns are predictable among European partners, who often share information better with U.S. intelligence agencies than directly.
\"Everyone sees the merits in sharing information with the Yanks,\" Hayden said, \"because if you want something spread around in Europe real quick, tell the Americans.\" A key principal for U.S. intelligence agencies is to create indebtedness, he said. When the United States needs help later, it gets it.
Hayden agreed with Levitt that Europe faces daunting cultural obstacles. The U.S. culture of assimilation, though far from perfect, is much stronger than in Western Europe, they said.
Bjrn Fgersten, a research fellow at the Swedish Institute for International Affairs, said November's terrorist rampage in Paris and the immigration crisis prompted cries for more information sharing in Europe.
Fgersten said countries have their own interests at heart, and sometimes economic interests prevail. A country negotiating deals with Iran, for instance, may not want to share information about the Persian nation with other European countries that could be bidding for the same deals.
Michelle Benson, a political science professor at the University at Buffalo, said different nations have different laws, which the European Union can't contradict. The EU requests, but doesn't require, information sharing. The EU tried to address the issue after the bombings in Paris, but little progress was made, she said.
\"No one does bureaucracy like the Europeans,\" Levitt said. \"But the bottom line is that the level of cooperation just doesn't meet the threat.\"
Contributing: Kevin Johnson
Credit: John Bacon, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Philippe Huguen, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 516
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
