"When I arrived in South Sudan last May, I was driven to a drab hotel that lacked soap or drinkable water in my room. The mosquito netting was riddled with holes.
A few hours later, I entered a vastly different universe.
The conference where I was speaking on press freedom was in a luxury hotel with crystal chandeliers, plush couches and smartly uniformed staff. \"Why am I not staying here?\" I asked the U.S. Embassy escort.
\"Security reasons,\" she said, explaining the entrance was too open and vulnerable to intruders. Juba, the capital, has a high crime rate and an underlying threat of terrorism. Attacks can be indiscriminate and aimed at foreigners, I was told.
My hotel had high walls and a lobby inside the compound, and it was frequented by locals.
Journalists, aid workers, contractors and others who travel to dangerous venues always are on the lookout for survival tips. Today, we face an additional challenge: How to travel safely in an era of rising terrorism. News reports tell of lone wolves, copycats and sleeper cells.
In January, Europol, the European Union's law enforcement agency, warned that the Islamic State has developed the ability to carry out large-scale attacks on a global stage with a focus in Europe. The attacks \"will primarily be directed at soft targets because of the impact it generates,\" the Europol report said.
Another indicator, the Global Terrorism Index, charted a dramatic rise in incidents from 2000 to 2014 and pointed out that so far only a fraction of them has occurred in Western nations.
The November massacre in Paris is an ominous sign.
\"Just being an American or Westerner can make you a target wherever you are,\" says Frank Smyth, executive director of Global Journalist Security. \"Everybody is worried.\" Today, half his business is providing safety consulting to NGOs.
I pay attention when Smyth tells me it is safer to sit away from windows and doors in a restaurant. If there is an explosion, you are less like to take shrapnel, he says. The former war correspondent opts for less conspicuous hotels and keeps a low profile.
Over the years, I have traded safety tricks with aid workers, contractors, NGO staff and fellow journalists. I also tap into online resources, such as the International News Safety Institute.
Some of what we do is basic: Leave itinerary and contact information with family or friends and have a check-in plan. Make copies of credit cards, airline tickets and passport. Carry a phone capable of making international calls.
Three things I never do: Tell strangers details of my personal life or travel plans; give them access to my devices, including use of my mobile phone; or allow them look over my shoulder while I'm on the iPad.
Three things I routinely do: Read news reports about the locale before I go; scan the Internet for updated safety advice; and check the closet and the bathroom while the bellman is in the room.
When operating in a hot zone, I go code red.
In violence-plagued Karachi, Pakistan, I request a room in the middle of the hotel, away from the parking lot and lobby. I prefer third or fourth floor, but not much higher, should rescuers need access.
I always sleep with a flashlight and phone within reach, and hang a Do Not Disturb sign on the door even when I'm out. Caution has paid off.
In Aden, Yemen, where I was conducting investigative reporting workshops, I awoke to find a man standing at the foot of the bed. I grabbed a flashlight and lit up the room. He ran.
The lock had been jimmied. There was no deadbolt or chain to prevent entry. I added an $8 rubber door wedge to my toolkit.
Not standing out as an American is also a good thing.
Bob Dietz, Asia coordinator the Committee to Protect Journalists, operates under the radar.
When in Kabul, he stays away from sunglasses, baseball caps, cargo pants, bright colors, khaki photographers' vests, camouflage T-shirts and PLO-checked black and white neck scarves popular with some foreigners.
\"I'm an older guy, and I've got a beard, so that helps a bit,\" Dietz says. CPJ's Journalist Security Guide provides useful tips for traveling off the beaten path.
For an upcoming trip to Latin America, I plan to use the State Department's STEP -- Smart Traveler Enrollment Program -- for security updates and alerts from the nearest embassy.
Safety protocols are not foolproof; at best, they provide an edge and build confidence. After the Paris attacks, a blogger with the handle \"Bemused Backpacker\" posted a line that caught my eye: \"If you stop traveling, the terrorists win. Keep calm and travel on.\"
I couldn't have said it better.
Ricchiardi, who specializes in international journalism training and conflict reporting, has worked in 25 countries.
Illustration
photo
Word count: 853
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
