"It was an unusually windy summer night in Nice, France, as revelers gathered Thursday along the seaside promenade there. French citizens, foreign tourists, families and friends described stiff gusts blowing through the palm trees and lashing the crowds that had come for ice cream, music and the annual Bastille Day fireworks. Here witnesses tell what it was like when they realized they were under attack. 'There Was a Crazy Wind' The seaside promenade was packed with people -- including many children -- who were surprised when a truck began tearing down the sidewalk. Peter Chesley, 42: I was with my ex-girlfriend, who was with friends. ... Our plans had been to watch the fireworks, eat ice cream, listen to the music, and just enjoy it and then go home. Wilma-Emilia Kuosa, 28: We were on the beach having a good time. There was a crazy wind after the fireworks. Emilie Bramly, 30: We were walking and enjoying our evening when we saw a bag on the floor and were trying to find a policeman to report it. All of a sudden we saw 15 armed police running, in the opposite direction of the huge crowd, which had gathered to watch the fireworks. They had guns, and they were saying: \"Run! Run! There is a truck!\" Mr. Chesley: I'm quite tall, and I heard sirens first. And I looked up, and I saw a white truck a couple of hundred of meters away. I saw it swerve and I thought, \"Well that's not a road he's using.\" And I said to my friends: \"There's something that's not right. Someone lost control of their truck.\" Robert Holloway, 68: We knew immediately that it was not an accident. We knew that it was someone out to kill. 'Chaos, Blue Lights Flashing, Sirens, People Screaming' Panic set in quickly as fireworks blasts were replaced by gunfire. Ms. Kuosa: Suddenly people were running and there were gunshots. Bang! Bang! Bang! Lucy Nesbitt-Comaskey: I said to my friend: \"That doesn't sound like fireworks. It sounds like we are in a war zone.\" Raja el-Kamel, 43: There was a white truck that was advancing slowly. Then it started to plow into the crowd, zigzagging and crushing people. I could not believe it. I saw him aiming at people and crushing them. It was a massacre. Nader El Shafei: So the truck just stopped in front of me, like one meter, one and a half meters maximum, and I saw the truck smashing a girl under it, and I noticed that behind the truck there was a lot of people down on the earth. I started to yell at the driver. He was wearing a uniform -- I think a blue uniform -- so I just thought that he has just lost control of the truck and it was an accident. Joelle Nouvel, 60: The truck was ramming over everything and everyone, and bodies were thrown in the air like bowling pins. The truck continued for two kilometers, and I heard about 50 shots fired. I saw a man with his 13-year-old girl who had been crushed to death, and he was cradling her in his arms. Everyone was screaming. The truck came within 50 centimeters of me. I was wearing a white dress, and it was soon stained with others' blood. It took about two minutes for the truck to travel two kilometers. Mr. Holloway: Then it was just chaos, blue lights flashing, sirens, people screaming.\" Mr. Chesley: I saw people rolling under the truck as it went past me, and I still can't believe it happened. People were being hit and thrown about like rag dolls. There was no control at all. I saw people rolled over and rolled under the truck. I saw about a couple of dozen people being mowed down. We then heard gunshots, so we ran in the opposite direction, crouching down. We decided to get out of this place, and we ran across the promenade. I just had to run through dead people. I saw 10 people afterwards either dead or dying. Mr. Shafei: I saw a guy next to me, just a few meters, pulling out the girl who was stuck with the truck under, getting her from down the truck. And she was almost not moving at all, and I kept waving to him, \"Stop, stop, there is people under your truck.\" And I saw him moving like this in a very nervous way and taking something up -- looks to me like a cellphone. I thought he's going to call the ambulance because it is an accident, and the police started to scream and to shout. And when he saw them come close to the truck, I saw him taking out his gun. 'What If a Killer Comes to the Cafe?' As the truck barreled more than a mile down the promenade, frightened revelers sought refuge in restaurants, hotels and casinos. Ms. Nesbitt-Comaskey: People ran into the restaurant and said that there had been an attack and people had been killed. One lady passed out on the floor and fainted. They shut the door of the restaurant and told us not to leave. When you are in that situation you don't know what to do. You freeze. Iris Pires, 16: We hid in the cafe but became afraid that someone could come and kill us. So we decided to go hide in the kitchen. I thought, \"What if a killer comes to the cafe?\" I thought we could die. I called my father. Ms. Bramly: We sought refuge in a casino near the Promenade des Anglais, and people were crammed in all the way against the wall. We heard gunshots ringing from outside. Then we heard that the truck was crushing people to death. Inside there were so many people, including children who had been separated from their parents during the mayhem. We all comforted each other. Strangers comforted strangers, those who were crying. People clasped hands. My friend was holding my hand. She was trembling. 'There Was No Escape' After police shot and killed the driver of the truck, many survivors did not know if that was the end or more terror was imminent. Daphné Burandé, 15: No one explained to us what was happening, and I heard some gunshots not very far away. Arno Bonnes, 48: I had two things in my mind: The image of the Bataclan shot through my head, and the other one was Tunisia. There was no escape, and everyone was panicking. We were ready to jump in the sea. There was a tsunami of people. Ms. Pires: The street was an apocalyptic scene. We tried to walk to the car. We were trembling. For me, Paris is the most vulnerable city, and every time I go to a public event in Paris I think there could be an attack. But we never thought it could happen here in Nice. We thought we were safe.
Photograph
A Woman at a Makeshift Shrine by the Promenade Des Anglais in Nice, France, Where More Than 80 People Were Killed On Thursday While They Gathered for Bastille Day Celebrations. (Photograph by Andrew Testa for the New York Times)
Word count: 1223
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 16, 2016"
