"JERUSALEM -- Two Palestinian assailants stabbed two Israeli women in a Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank on Monday, wounding one of them severely, before being fatally shot by a security guard, according to the Israeli police.
It was the third stabbing attack inside a West Bank settlement in eight days, and in all three cases the victims were women.
A 23-year-old woman was critically wounded in Monday's attack in the settlement of Beit Horon, and another woman, 58, was in moderate condition, according to the Magen David Adom ambulance service.
In a new twist -- after four months of Palestinian stabbings, car rammings and gun attacks against Israelis -- the police and the military said three explosive devices had been found near the scene of the attack. The devices, which the police described as improvised pipe bombs, did not explode.
The police identified Monday's assailants as a Palestinian man and teenager, about 22 and 16. The older one, they said, was a resident of the Palestinian village of Beit Ur al-Tahta, near Beit Horon.
The two women were stabbed outside a grocery store in the settlement, according to the police. The assailants then headed for the store. Security camera footage appeared to show two men in dark hoodies trying to enter with knives in their hands as the store owner blocked them with a shopping cart. As they ran further into the settlement, a security guard shot and killed them.
About 25 Israelis, an American student and one Palestinian bystander have been killed in the attacks since Oct. 1. About 150 Palestinians have been killed during the same period. Up to two-thirds of them have been described by Israel as assailants. Others have been killed during protests and clashes with the Israeli security forces in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, and along Israel's border with Gaza.
An Israeli mother of six, Dafna Meir, was stabbed to death in the doorway of her home in the settlement of Otniel on Jan. 17, and a pregnant woman was wounded in a separate attack in a secondhand clothing charity store in Tekoa, another settlement, a day later. In both cases the suspects, who are under arrest, are 15-year-old Palestinian boys. Israel's Shin Bet security agency said the Otniel attacker told his interrogators that he had been influenced by Palestinian television broadcasts that cast Israel as \"a killer of young Palestinians.\"
Israel's leaders attribute much of the violence to what they describe as incitement in the Palestinian news media and on social networks. Palestinians say the frustrations caused by the Israeli occupation are at the root of the outburst of violence.
Many settlements employ Palestinians for maintenance and other work. While some settlements are surrounded by fences fitted with sensors and security cameras, others have refused to be fenced off on ideological grounds.
On Saturday, a Palestinian girl, 13, was fatally shot by an Israeli security guard at the entrance to the West Bank settlement of Anatot after she ran at him with a knife. The police and relatives said she had set out from her home in the nearby Palestinian village of Anata after arguing with her family.
\"These difficult times are fraught with confrontation and we will overcome,\" Israel's president, Reuven Rivlin, said in a statement. \"We will continue to fight against terrorism and the incitement which drives it. In the face of terror, we choose life.\"
Also Monday, the Israeli authorities announced that they had arrested twin sisters from a Palestinian village in the West Bank who were plotting terrorist attacks against Israelis. The 18-year-old sisters were arrested about a month ago after pipe bombs, materials to prepare explosives and headbands of Hamas, the Islamic militant group, were found during a search of their home, according to Shin Bet.
The agency said in a statement that one of the sisters bought the chemicals after learning how to make bombs from instruction videos on the Internet. The other sister helped hide the bombs, Shin Bet said. They have been charged in an Israeli military court on counts including building explosive devices.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
Word count: 710
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 26, 2016"
