"One of the people who have joined the Bundy family on a federal wildlife sanctuary in an arid patch of Oregon is an avowed anti-Semite from Ohio. One is an anti-Islamic ideologue from Phoenix.
Another is an online radio host -- also from Ohio -- who uses terms like \"Obamislamistan.\"
Some are militant gun-rights activists, and one is a man who has declared himself to be a judge and plans to convene a \"citizens' grand jury\" in order to put the government on trial.
When the occupation of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge began on Jan. 2, it was primarily the work of Ammon Bundy, the former rancher, who wants the federal government to relinquish its lands.
But as the protest has dragged on, it has become a magnet of sorts, attracting strands of diverse conservative movements from across the country.
Some are members of the so-called Patriot movement, an umbrella effort of antigovernment activists that includes groups like the Oath Keepers, an organization of law enforcement officers and military veterans, and the 3 Percent of Idaho, which focuses on the Second Amendment and derives its name from the supposed 3 percent of the colonial population that took up arms against the British.
One of the 3 Percent group's most recent focuses has been fighting the presence of refugees in Idaho.
The local authorities, as well as many local residents, have made it clear that they would like them all to leave.
At first, the logic behind the conflict seemed coherent: The Bundy brothers, sons of the Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy, who made national news two years ago by facing down the government over cattle-grazing fees, wanted the federal government to turn its land holdings over to private citizens and local control. In recent days, however, the protest has metastasized and started drawing a motley cast of fellow travelers.
Some are staying in the rural town of Burns, which is 30 miles from the wildlife sanctuary and the nearest community of any size, and others have shown up at the refuge, armed with their own ideas and weapons.
\"When you have a high-profile event like this, lots of people want to get in on the action,\" said Mark Pitcavage, the senior research fellow for the Anti-Defamation League's Center on Extremism. \"It has the ability to draw all sorts out of the woodwork.\"
Among them is David Fry, a 27-year-old Ohioan who has regularly posted homophobic and anti-Semitic messages on social media. Jon Ritzheimer, who is also camped out with the Bundys, is a Marine veteran from Arizona who drew national attention in May when he organized an anti-Islam protest at a mosque in Phoenix; the mosque had been attended by a pair of Muslim men who opened fire earlier that month at a \"Draw Mohammad\" contest in Garland, Tex.
There was also Pete Santilli, the conservative host of \"The Pete Santilli Show,\" who roamed about the refuge with a camera on a stick, cheering occupiers and heckling journalists.
Mr. Santilli spoke on his online radio show last spring about a \"battle between heterosexuals and homosexuals\" and once drew scrutiny from the Secret Service after saying he wanted to shoot Hillary Clinton.
At Malheur, he is working alongside people like Bruce Doucette, a computer technician who reportedly plans to seek indictments against federal officials and describes himself as a United States Superior Court judge -- even though no such office exists.
\"What we're seeing is an amalgamation of a lot of different and disparate strands of the extremist movement converging in one place,\" said Ryan Lenz, a senior writer for the Southern Poverty Law Center, which tracks and studies extremist groups. \"Although they all have slightly separate agendas, they've come together in Oregon because of the same intense resentment of the government.\"
According to Mr. Pitcavage, who has written an analysis of the philosophies behind the occupation, about a third of the protesters in Oregon were motivated, like the Bundys, by land-use issues that have bedeviled the West since the Sagebrush Rebellion of the 1970s.
The rest, he said, were drawn from various factions of the Patriot movement.
This coalition first emerged, Mr. Pitcavage said, in the crucible of the Bundy ranch standoff in 2014, during which a group of volunteer gunmen assumed positions on a highway near the town of Bunkerville, Nev., and chased off agents from the federal Bureau of Land Management who wanted to collect grazing fees from Cliven Bundy.
\"Before the Bundy ranch, I'd be hard pressed to think of something similar,\" Mr. Pitcavage said. \"It was the first major example of militiamen and Sagebrush Rebellion types spending time together and getting to know each other personally. It set the stage for what's happening today.\"
Some people who have studied such movements say the Oregon occupation's new recruits have been encouraged by the inaction of the federal government, which has largely left the matter to be handled by the county sheriff, David Ward.
The federal authorities have so far avoided any confrontation with the occupiers, wary of provoking a shootout.
\"There's no question that there is now a brand of success associated with Bundy family standoffs,\" said Tarso Ramos, the executive director of Political Research Associates, a think tank that studies right-wing movements. \"And the success of this standoff in surviving so far has emboldened factions that once decried the effort to act in a more confrontational manner.\"
Mr. Ramos pointed to the Oath Keepers, whose president, Stewart Rhodes, issued a statement during the first week of the standoff saying his group would not get involved. Mr. Rhodes later changed course, announcing that he would send an Oath Keeper team to Oregon, albeit without long guns or camouflage gear and only to \"keep the peace.\"
The Oath Keepers are staying in Burns, not at the wildlife refuge. Well before this protest began, Mr. Ritzheimer and Mr. Rhodes had a public falling out.
Not everyone agreed that a muted federal response had fueled the growth of the occupation. Mr. Pitcavage argued that if the government had cracked down on the Bundys, as it did at conflicts in Waco, Tex., and Ruby Ridge, Idaho, it could easily \"draw attention to the effort and draw more people like a magnet.\"
Nor was everyone in Oregon there because of an antigovernment agenda.
\"I do not understand the culture,\" said Kristi Jernigan, 44, from Tennessee, who was among the women in the compound's kitchen feeding the occupation. Ms. Jernigan said she had little interest in politics and had arrived only \"to spread love.\"
\"You'd be surprised at all the different people here,\" she said.
Credit: ALAN FEUER; Julie Turkewitz contributed reporting from Burns, Ore.
Photograph
Activists at the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Oregon Gathered Around a Fire Last Week. Various Factions of the so-Called Patriot Movement Have Joined the Occupation. (Photograph by Ruth Fremson/the New York Times)
Word count: 1172
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 17, 2016"
