"WASHINGTON -- Three human rights groups on Wednesday urged President Obama to pardon Edward J. Snowden, the former intelligence contractor who leaked secret documents about National Security Agency surveillance in 2013 and is living in Russia as a fugitive from criminal charges.
The start of the campaign coincides with the theatrical release this week of the movie \"Snowden,\" a sympathetic, fictionalized version of his story by the director Oliver Stone. Together, the film and the campaign, called \"Pardon Snowden,\" opened a new chapter in the debate about the surveillance Mr. Snowden revealed and about whether his leaks will go down in history as whistle-blowing or treason.
The campaign, organized by the American Civil Liberties Union, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, includes a petition that has been signed by technologists, law professors and celebrities. At a news conference, Mr. Snowden appeared by remote video link, thanking the organizers and arguing that his fate will have a broader impact.
\"If we are to sustain a free society through the next century, we must ensure that whistle-blowers can act again, and safely, as a check on future abuses of power,\" Mr. Snowden said. If he is sentenced to a long prison term, he added, people in the future who have information that the public needs to know will be afraid to come forward.
The chances that Mr. Obama will issue a pardon appear slim. In late July, Mr. Obama's counterterrorism adviser, Lisa Monaco, rejected the idea as she responded on behalf of the administration to a two-year-old petition on the White House's website that asked the president to pardon him.
\"Mr. Snowden's dangerous decision to steal and disclose classified information had severe consequences for the security of our country and the people who work day in and day out to protect it,\" she wrote, adding that he \"should come home to the United States, and be judged by a jury of his peers -- not hide behind the cover of an authoritarian regime.\"
Mr. Snowden said he could not receive a fair trial because he was charged under the Espionage Act, which does not permit defendants to argue to the jury that they should be acquitted because their whistle-blowing served the public interest.
In June 2013, soon after The Guardian and The Washington Post began publishing revelations about secret N.S.A. surveillance and data collection programs, Mr. Snowden identified himself as the source of the information. He was in Hong Kong, and he later sought to travel to Latin America via Moscow and Cuba. But the State Department revoked his passport, stranding him in Russia.
Last year, an appeals court ruled that the first program he revealed -- the N.S.A.'s bulk collection of Americans' domestic phone records -- was illegal. Congress last year ended that program, replacing it with one in which the bulk data stays in the hands of phone companies.
In addition, many technology companies have increased the security of their products in response to his disclosures about the N.S.A.'s widespread surveillance of the internet in operations overseas, where few domestic legal limits apply; its efforts to weaken encryption; and its hacking operations.
Critics of Mr. Snowden's disclosures maintain that they have made it harder to gather intelligence about foreign adversaries and terrorists, and even for law enforcement officials to carry out court-approved wiretapping on ordinary criminal suspects.
\"Mr. Snowden is not a whistle-blower,\" Marc Raimondi, a spokesman for the Justice Department's national security division, said Wednesday. \"He is accused of leaking classified information, and there is no question his actions have inflicted serious harms on our national security.\"
But Anthony Romero, the A.C.L.U.'s executive director, argued that the disclosures had brought to light abuses and protected the privacy of ordinary people. He said a pardon \"would be an important counterpoint to some of the most problematic aspects of President Obama's national security legacy.\"
Mr. Snowden signed off before the news conference was over. His lawyer, Ben Wizner, said he needed to perform technical checks for another event on Wednesday in which he was scheduled to appear remotely with Mr. Stone and the actor who portrays him in \"Snowden,\" Joseph Gordon-Levitt.
The movie presents Mr. Snowden -- who appears in person in its final scene -- in starkly heroic terms, mixing accurate re-creations of people, historical events and N.S.A. programs with exaggerated or invented ones.
On Wednesday, a reporter asked whether Mr. Snowden hoped the film would increase his chances of a pardon. Mr. Snowden demurred, saying he thought the film's most important impact would be to reach a broader audience about \"the issues that matter the most.\"
\"The story of 2013, I think quite centrally, and about the film, is that from time to time we see that governments redraw the boundaries of our rights behind closed doors,\" he said. \"And that may be many things, but I would argue that one thing that it is not is that it's not American.\"
AuthorAffiliation
CHARLIE SAVAGE Follow Charlie Savage on Twitter @charlie_savage.
Photograph
Edward J. Snowden Speaking by Remote Video Link From Moscow, Thanking Organizers for the Petition Calling for His Pardon. (Photograph by Spencer Platt/Getty Images)
Word count: 886
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 15, 2016"
