"WASHINGTON -- Even by the standards of an epically polarized Washington, the political talk about President Obama's effort to close the Guantá namo Bay prison is starkly divorced from facts. On both sides of the debate, many claims collapse under scrutiny.
Republicans who want to keep the prison open say only the worst of the worst are left, yet dozens of low-level detainees were approved for transfer years ago and stranded for geopolitical reasons. Republicans insist Guantánamo's military commissions offer tough justice, but those tribunals have been largely dysfunctional. And they cite Bush-era data to say that freed prisoners will join terrorist groups, but the Obama administration has performed more thorough reviews and those it released have been far less likely to cause problems.
Yet a key argument Mr. Obama makes for shuttering the prison in Cuba -- that its continued operation is contrary to \"our values\" -- crumbles upon examination, too. His plan for closing it would not eliminate the main human rights complaints, because the United States would still be holding several dozen prisoners in perpetual detention without trial and force-feeding those who go on a hunger strike. It would just do that in a prison on American soil.
The loose talk has produced years of politicized stalemate, spotlighted again late last month when Mr. Obama announced with fanfare a plan to close the prison that in reality recycled a plan he has pursued since 2009. Congressional Republicans, who have for years baselessly accused him of having no plan, promptly pronounced it dead on arrival.
\"Both the Republicans and the president are significantly exaggerating the threats and harms posed by the other side's positions,\" said Jack Goldsmith, a top Justice Department official in the George W. Bush administration, now at Harvard Law School. \"The moral and national security arguments on both sides mostly serve other agendas -- political advantage for the Republicans, and legacy burnishing for the president.\"
To understand how Guantánamo became less a policy dilemma than a charged political symbol not always anchored to facts, it helps to return to some crucial events early in the Obama presidency.
In January 2009, the newly inaugurated President Obama ordered his administration to close the prison within a year. Of the nearly 800 detainees held there under President Bush, all but 242 had been transferred overseas. But his task force soon reported bad news: It was likely to designate several dozen detainees as impossible to prosecute for various reasons, but too dangerous to release.
Bowing to pragmatism, Mr. Obama decided those detainees would have to remain locked up without trial for the time being. He also accepted the principle that some detainees would be tried by military commission, not in civilian court, in part because the looser military rules of evidence would allow trials for more of those held.
From that moment, his plan could no longer be a clarion call to restore a pre-Sept. 11, 2001, understanding of the rule of law and to vindicate human rights. Instead, the administration has offered a hodgepodge of practical considerations, like saving money and rebranding detention to leave behind the toxic image of shackled prisoners in orange jumpsuits from Guantánamo's early years.
A Political Hammer
Not long after Mr. Obama quietly abandoned his strongest moral argument against the prison, the Republicans discovered its potency as a political hammer.
In the 2008 campaign, there was bipartisan consensus that Guantánamo had to close. But in 2009, political headwinds began to rise. A White House plan to release in Virginia two Chinese detainees, judged not to be \"enemy combatants\" after all, prompted an uproar, and that summer Congress banned any such releases on domestic soil.
That set the stage for another pivotal event: In January 2010, Scott Brown, a Republican, won a surprise victory in a special election to fill a vacant Senate seat in liberal Massachusetts. Polling data showed that no issue had boosted him more than his attack on Democrats for sending terrorists to domestic civilian courts rather than to Guantánamo. Mr. Brown had pounded on that theme after a Nigerian man was charged with trying to blow up a Detroit-bound airliner on Christmas with a bomb in his underwear.
\"National security was more important to us than health care,\" Eric Fehrnstrom, a strategist for the Brown campaign, said in a recent interview.
Members of Congress from both parties took heed. By the end of January, Democrats from New York turned against the Obama administration's plan to send five Guantánamo detainees accused in the Sept. 11 attacks to Manhattan for a civilian trial; the White House retreated. Soon after, the Republican Senate leader, Mitch McConnell, told fellow party members that the message that terrorists should always be handled as enemy combatants, not criminal defendants, was powerful political ammunition.
\"I hope the administration is beginning to get the message here that where they are is not only wrong on the merits but wrong politically,\" Mr. McConnell said during a question period after a blistering speech attacking Mr. Obama's terrorism policies on Feb. 3, 2010. \"I tell my members, 'Hey, you can campaign on these issues anywhere in America -- as Scott Brown demonstrated in the most liberal state in America.' \"
From that point on, it became an ideological article of faith for nearly all Republicans that Guantánamo should stay open, and that newly captured terrorism suspects should be sent there and handled exclusively by the military. That was a turnabout for their party -- the Bush administration had regularly and successfully charged terrorism suspects in federal court.
Every event in counterterrorism began to be reinterpreted in light of this new Republican stance.
Mr. Obama's critics declared repeatedly that the would-be Christmas bomber had stopped talking because he was read the Miranda warning and given a defense lawyer, showing that F.B.I.-style interrogations did not work for terrorists. In fact, he had stopped talking before he was read the warning, and the F.B.I.'s methods, including enlisting the help of his family, were successful: In just a few weeks, the committed zealot started cooperating and provided a wealth of intelligence.
When a former Guantánamo detainee, Ahmed Ghailani, was tried in federal court in the fall of 2010 and acquitted on almost all charges brought against him related to the 1998 East Africa embassy bombings -- mostly individual murder counts for each person who died -- Republicans portrayed the outcome as a victory for the defendant that showed civilian courts were too weak for terrorists. But he was still convicted of his role in that attack and sentenced to life in prison.
Federal civilian prosecutors have been ruthlessly effective, winning severe sentences in one terrorism case after another, including a death sentence for Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, the Boston Marathon bomber.
Republicans have continued to portray military commissions as the far stronger option, but the reverse appears to be true. The Sept. 11 case, the most important terrorism case in American history, has been mired in years of pretrial hearings as it has stumbled through one problem after another, including defense challenges to many of the rules in the untested, built-from-scratch military judicial system. No trial is yet in sight, and years of appeals will lurk beyond any distant, hypothetical conviction.
The handful of convictions the system has produced, mostly from plea deals, have yielded relatively brief sentences. An illustrative case is that of Ibrahim al-Qosi, a Sudanese man who was once Osama bin Laden's cook and driver. Captured in 2001, he pleaded guilty in 2010 to \"providing material support for terrorism,\" was required to serve two more years, and was repatriated in 2012.
Mr. Qosi recently appeared in a propaganda video from Al Qaeda's Yemen branch, and Republicans have pointed to his case as an example of the folly of the administration's policy of transferring lower-level detainees. The fact was that Mr. Qosi was released because of the military commissions system.
Polarization Deepens
At the end of 2010, Congress banned transferring detainees to the United States for any purpose, including trials, and imposed steep restrictions on sending any elsewhere. Since then, the polarization over Guantánamo, often feeding on inaccuracies, has grown only deeper.
Whenever the Obama administration does transfer a detainee, Republican critics portray that step as reckless, arguing that \"recidivism\" data shows that one of every three who are released will go on to engage in terrorist or insurgent activity.
In fact, the one-in-three figure comes from confirmed and suspected problems among the 532 men who were transferred in the Bush era -- an effort that included bulk repatriations of Saudis and Afghans.
The Obama administration has used a far more calibrated and individualized review process in deciding whom to release and where to send them. Of 146 men transferred since 2009, only six are \"confirmed\" and six more are \"suspected\" to have caused problems -- about one in 12, according to the most recent public data.
Republicans have lately adopted a new talking point: that the less risky detainees have been long since transferred, so only the most dangerous prisoners remain. That is inaccurate, too.
There are some high-level terrorists at the prison, including the 9/11 defendants. But there are also many low-level detainees who remain only because they are from Yemen, which is in turmoil. The government only recently started resettling Yemenis elsewhere; of the 36 left on the transfer list today, 29 are Yemenis.
The fact that those prisoners are still at Guantánamo \"does not mean that they, as a group, are more dangerous than other detainees,\" Lee Wolosky, the State Department envoy who negotiates detainee transfers, said at a recent panel discussion. \"It means they are more Yemeni than other detainees.\"
Back in late 2001, when the Bush administration opened the prison, it was an ad hoc solution to an immediate problem: the need to hold hundreds of prisoners captured in Afghanistan away from the war zone. Few imagined it would still be operating -- at a cost of nearly half a billion dollars a year -- almost 15 years later.
The isolated American naval base in Cuba seemed to offer a key advantage: The Bush administration believed the prisoners were beyond the reach of any court and not protected by the Geneva Conventions. But a series of Supreme Court rulings demolished those claims, establishing court jurisdiction and declaring that the Geneva Conventions protected them.
That helped persuade President Bush to move toward closing it; in his 2010 memoir, he wrote that the \"detention facility had become a propaganda tool for our enemies and a distraction for our allies.\" They are the very same arguments Mr. Obama still makes today.
The United States appears certain to be holding some detainees without trial when Mr. Obama leaves office, though it seems possible that the number will reach zero under a successor. But the Republican presidential candidates have a different vision, which some discussed when Mr. Obama announced his closing plan Feb. 23.
\"We're going to load it up with some bad dudes,\" Donald J. Trump told a cheering crowd in Nevada. For good measure, he also promised to cut the prison operation's cost -- some $40 million a month -- to \"peanuts.\"
He did not explain how.
Photograph
Camp X-Ray, Where the First Detainees to Arrive at GuantáNamo Bay, Cuba, Were Housed Temporarily. Journalists Listened to President Obama Last Month As He Discussed Closing the Prison. In a 2010 Speech, Senator Mitch Mcconnell of Kentucky Criticized Mr. Obama's Terrorism Policies. (Photographs by Damon Winter/the New York Times; Stephen Crowley/the New York Times; Luke Sharrett/the New York Times) (A10)
Word count: 1945
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 7, 2016"
