"DHAKA, Bangladesh -- The police in Bangladesh have identified seven of nine militants killed in a raid in Dhaka on Tuesday, including a Bangladeshi-born American citizen connected to the men who carried out the July 1 attack on the Holey Artisan bakery, a popular restaurant, in which 22 people died.
The American, Shazad Rouf, was a student at North South University in Dhaka. The authorities learned of Mr. Rouf in early February when they raided a hide-out belonging to a group of men who, they said, were planning a terrorist attack. They arrested three of the men, who told them that Mr. Rouf and other men had fled, said Masudur Rahman, a spokesman for the Dhaka Metropolitan Police.
Mr. Rouf's father filed a missing-person report for his son with the police on Feb. 6, said Mr. Rahman, who identified the son as an American citizen who was born in Bangladesh. It was unclear how long he had been living here.
The other man who escaped from the February raid, Nibras Islam, resurfaced on July 1 as one of five attackers on the Holey Artisan bakery in Dhaka. Mr. Islam was killed by the army after that attack.
When asked about Mr. Rouf, Marina Yasmin, a spokeswoman for the United States Embassy in Dhaka, said she could not comment on individuals.
Besides Mr. Rouf, the other six militants identified after Tuesday's gun battle with police officers who surrounded their hide-out, a house in the Kallyanpur neighborhood in Dhaka, were Bangladeshi. They included Rakibul Hassan, about 20, who was wounded by the police and taken into custody.
Mr. Hassan's mother told the police that her son had been missing for a year, said Officer Abul Basher, who is in charge of the Bogra police station in northern Bangladesh, where the Hassan family is from.
Another student at North South University, Taj-Ul-Huq-Rashik, was among the dead. The remaining two militants killed in the raid were not identified.
Mr. Rahman said of Mr Rouf, \"It is clear that he and other members of their present group at Kallyanpur area had links with the terrorist group that attacked the Holey Artisan restaurant.\"
The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the Holey Artisan attack, as well as other recent militant attacks that have been escalating over the past few months, but the Bangladeshi government has said that the attacks were the work of domestic terrorists.
The police said the militants killed in the raid were suspected of involvement in a banned local militant group, Jama'atul Mujahedeen Bangladesh.
A list of 10 high-value suspects released this month includes three Bangladeshi expatriates who had been living in Canada, Australia and Japan and are sought by the police on suspicion of setting up recruitment pipelines for the Islamic State.
It is not clear that Mr. Rouf or the other militants identified from Tuesday's raid are connected to this list of suspects.
Credit: JULFIKAR ALI MANIK; Maher Sattar contributed reporting from Dhaka, and Nida Najar from New Delhi.
Word count: 508
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 28, 2016"
