"The war in Afghanistan -- America's longest conflict -- will grind on for at least four more years as NATO allies are ready to commit $5 billion through 2020 to train, equip and pay Afghan security forces, according to a senior NATO diplomat.
Last week, President Obama granted U.S. troops in Afghanistan expanded authority to attack Taliban insurgents. The new rules allow U.S. forces to advise regular Afghan combat units and to call in airstrikes. There are about 9,800 U.S. troops in Afghanistan, and Obama has pledged to reduce their number to 5,500 by year's end.
Defense Secretary Ashton Carter said the more aggressive approach put U.S. forces closer to the fight against the Taliban. The previous rules allowed U.S. troops in Afghanistan to protect themselves and to aid forces in peril.
\"We will more proactively support Afghan conventional forces in two critical ways: one, with more American firepower, especially through close air support; and two, by accompanying and advising Afghan conventional forces on the ground and in the air. In practical terms, this means that U.S. forces will have more opportunities to accompany and enable Afghan conventional forces -- just like we have already been doing with Afghan special operations forces,\" Carter said.
The expanded authority will give U.S. commanders in Afghanistan more flexibility by allowing them to identify and get approval for air targets in advance, instead of just responding to emergencies, Gen. Mark Welsh, the Air Force chief of staff, said in Washington.
\"It will allow them to have aircraft planned to respond in support of a particular operation,\" Welsh said.
The Pentagon said the new authority will be limited to operations and missions that would have a significant impact on the battle and would not be used on a routine basis. Welsh said there are enough resources in Afghanistan to support the expanded authority.
NATO will continue to deploy troops throughout Afghanistan into 2017, NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg said.
\"We are working on the final decisions for our force numbers into 2017,\" Stoltenberg said.
Security in Afghanistan remains \"tough,\" said the senior diplomat who spoke on condition of anonymity because officials were not authorized to speak publicly.
Afghan troops struggle to find competent leaders and supply troops in the field. Taliban insurgents continue to find safe haven in Pakistan and have exploited divisions in the Afghan government, the official said.
Contributing: Jim Michaels
Credit: Tom Vanden Brook, @tvandenbrook, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo JAWED KARGAR, European PressPhoto Agency
Word count: 442
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
