"Last week's deadly terror attacks in Brussels put national security, and specifically border security, front and center in the presidential election. This renewed focus is welcome, but it has been nearly 12 years since my colleagues and I on the 9/11 Commission's border security team wrote a 233-page report, separate from the commission's main findings, detailing how and why terrorists move around the world, exploit immigration laws and weak border controls for destructive ends -- and how they can be detected and disrupted.
That we are still having the same conversation indicates that, whatever might have been done, it has not been enough.
Transnational terrorist groups require freedom of movement for many reasons, including training, communications, surveillance, committing terrorist acts and escaping capture. Al-Qaeda studied national immigration policies and practices, monitored modes of transportation and ports of entry, and trained operatives in the use of fraudulent travel documents and how to appear inconspicuous.
The Islamic State terrorist group is doing the same thing.
Therefore, when we speak of border security, it is important to be clear about what we mean. It does not simply mean building a wall on the southern border or barring Syrian refugees.
Our team concluded that 15 of the 19 Sept. 11 hijackers were potentially vulnerable to interception. Why weren't they caught?
Too many of our border and immigration laws and operating procedures, including what information is shared with front-line security personnel, conspired against it -- and still do today.
We are still issuing multiple-year, multiple-entry tourist visas to citizens of high-risk countries. As the 9/11 attack illustrated, this type of visa allowed the four pilots to come in and out of the U.S. 17 times over 21 months. We are also still holding a \"diversity\" lottery in which we offer 50,000 green cards a year to citizens of \"underrepresented\" countries.
Equally concerning are reliable reports suggesting that as many as 5,000 European Union citizens traveled to Iraq and Syria to join ISIL. EU member states participate in the U.S. Visa Waiver Program (VWP), meaning that anyone with a Belgian passport, for example, can travel visa-free to the U.S., despite weak new rules intended to stop them finally imposed in January.
One of the conditions for inclusion in the VWP is \"maintenance of high counterterrorism, law enforcement, border control, and document security standards.\" The recent European migration crisis, the attacks in Paris and Brussels, and an EU report calling for urgent improvements to border security raise serious questions about whether this standard is being met.
What is required now is not only a renewed focus and robust effort to urgently secure our nation's border and enhance border security globally, but also new leadership to get the job done once and for all.
Kelly Moore, who worked with the State Department on counterterrorism, was on the 9/11 Commission's border security team.
Word count: 496
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
