"BERLIN -- A German special police unit has detained a Syrian asylum-seeker who they said they suspected of plotting a terrorist attack during the opening of the national soccer league season, German officials said Tuesday.
Germany has been on edge after four attacks in a span of six days last month, including two linked to the Islamic State.
Officers from the special unit arrested the 24-year-old suspect on Friday in the city of Mutterstadt, in the western state of Rhineland-Palatinate, after the authorities in Duisburg received a tip about a possible attack, the Interior Ministry in neighboring North Rhine-Westphalia said. The suspect has been questioned and will remain in detention pending the outcome of the investigation, the ministry said.
Michael Maurer, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry in the state of Rhineland-Palatinate, said there had been indications that the suspect was plotting an attack directed at the opening of Germany's top soccer league, the Bundesliga, later this month.
German officials would not confirm reports that the suspect had links to the Islamic State but said that the investigation was continuing.
German security officials are on high alert after the attacks in July. The attackers in the two assaults claimed by the Islamic State, a 17-year-old who said he was from Afghanistan and a 27-year-old Syrian, had both applied for asylum in Germany.
The two attacks, in Würzburg on July 18 and nearby Ansbach six days later, wounded 20 people.
Last year, Germany took in nearly one million migrants and refugees, many of them from Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan. But resistance to the newcomers has been increasing in parts of the country amid growing fears that Islamic extremists may have infiltrated the ranks of those in genuine need of asylum.
The suspect detained in Mutterstadt had been under police observation for weeks, after the state authorities in North Rhine-Westphalia, where he had first been sheltered, had received a tip about him, the authorities said.
\"We will not let violent Salafists off easy,\" Ralf Jäger, the interior minister for North Rhine-Westphalia, said in a statement, referring to an ultraconservative, sometimes militant movement in Sunni Islam. \"We accept every tip and investigate it thoroughly.\"
Under German law, the federal prosecutor in Karlsruhe would take over any case that is found to have a link to terrorism, but so far the investigation has remained in the hands of state prosecutors in Duisburg.
Detlef Nowotsch, a spokesman for the office in Duisburg, refused to comment on the detention, citing the continuing investigation.
AuthorAffiliation
MELISSA EDDY Follow Melissa Eddy on Twitter @meddynyt.
Word count: 447
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 10, 2016"
