"WASHINGTON -- Federal prosecutors on Thursday charged that a former bank teller in the Washington suburbs joined the Islamic State in Syria in December, received religious training for months and pledged to become a suicide bomber.
Nearly 90 people in the United States have been prosecuted in the last two years in connection with support for the Islamic State, but the case against Mohamad Jamal Khweis, 26, of Alexandria, Va., is among the most unusual.
While more than three dozen Americans have been accused of trying to go to the Middle East to join the Islamic State, Mr. Khweis is one of a small number thought to have actually made it. And he is the only one who appears to have surrendered in a battle zone after changing his mind.
After his apprehension in Syria in March, Mr. Khweis told an F.B.I. agent that he was first \"inspired\" to join the Islamic State last year because he was drawn to its mission of establishing a caliphate in the Middle East, according to a criminal complaint filed against him in United States District Court in Alexandria.
In the F.B.I. interview, he said that he knew that the Islamic State used violence and wanted to \"destroy\" the United States, but he also said that the group \"engaged in peaceful and humanitarian efforts.\"
Mr. Khweis told the F.B.I. that he flew from Baltimore to London last December and continued on to Turkey, where he made contact online with an Islamic State recruiter, prosecutors said.
He said he then traveled into Syria with four other recruits and stayed in a \"safe house\" with the group's distinctive black flag displayed; he was given a new name of Abu Omar al-Amriki, or Abu Omar the American, prosecutors said.
When an Islamic State member asked him if he wanted to be a suicide bomber, \"the defendant answered 'yes,\"' according to the complaint.
Mr. Khweis said he received the bulk of his \"religious training\" from the Islamic State at a separate location in Mosul, Iraq. \"The defendant admitted that at the end of every lesson, the Imam stated 'may God destroy America,\"' prosecutors said.
Prosecutors made no mention in their complaint of the unusual circumstances behind Mr. Khweis's apprehension or what he says was his change of heart.
Kurdish soldiers found Mr. Khweis in March, unarmed and wandering near the ancient Iraqi city of Sinjar, near the site of violent clashes with Islamic State fighters. He told the Kurds in a mix of English and broken Arabic that he wanted to surrender.
In an interview with a Kurdish news media outlet after he was taken into custody, Mr. Khweis said that he had fled the Islamic State because \"I found it very, very hard to live there.\" He said he hoped to cross back into Turkey and return to the United States.
He said he was \"not thinking straight\" when he decided to join with the Islamic State, calling it \"a bad decision.\"
The Justice Department returned Mr. Khweis to the United States late Wednesday night before his Thursday court appearance.
Family members could not be reached for comment Thursday. After Mr. Khweis's apprehension in March, his father, Jamal Khweis, told reporters that he was not certain what happened to his son or where he was.
\"He's old enough,\" the father said. \"I cannot ask him where he's going, where he's coming from.\" A brother said that the family was thankful that he had been found.
Mr. Khweis worked as a teller at a bank in Northern Virginia until about 2011 and attended community college. His father is a limousine driver, and his mother is a licensed cosmetologist.
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.
Follow Eric Lichtblau on Twitter @EricLichtblau.
Word count: 649
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 10, 2016"
