"Last week Donald Trump Jr. took to Twitter to compare the theoretical security threat posed by admitting refugees into the United States to a bowl of Skittles.
\"If I had a bowl of Skittles and I told you just three would kill you. Would you take a handful?\"
After a lot of people pointed out that the analogy was insensitive -- Skittles are after all candy and refugees are people -- the Republican presidential candidate's eldest son defended the tweet, saying it was just a simple metaphor.
\"You know people will today make what they want of anything, and they see the worst in everything and they look for subtext that doesn't exist,\" he said.
Indeed.
Just ask Mohamad Helani, a 13-year-old Syrian refugee who now lives in Austria. USA TODAY has spent the last year writing about him and his family as part of our efforts to put a human face on a crisis that's all too easy to forget has one.
Each time we have written about Mohamad, the reaction is similar on social media and in USA TODAY's online comments forum.
He's called a suicide bomber in the making, an Islamist who will grow up to use sexual assault as a weapon. Because he has ambitions to be a pilot, it's suggested that Mohamad will one day hijack a plane and fly it into a tall building.
\"Mohamad + pilot = enough said,\" as one reader put it, a reference to Mohamed Atta, one of the ringleaders of the 9/11 attacks in New York.
Others are just plain cruel: \"No one really cares about this kid or the others ones that didn't make it.\"
There are of course any number of completely reasonable reasons to not take an interest in Mohamad's plight.
You don't know him. You will probably never meet him. You might have sympathy fatigue. Your empathy bone might never have made it into the box in the first place. You might feel, as a growing number of electorates around the world do, that all this welcoming of displaced people from conflict zones comes at the expense of your job, security, prosperity, identity.
Radicalization and terrorism are real and present dangers. We know that. And an unprecedented influx of asylum seekers from a different culture, religion and geography represents a unique challenge for local communities from Bavaria to Boise to Brisbane. That is also axiomatic. As is the need to take the comments of online bullies with a large grain of salt, because they often come from a small number of people who can shout louder than anyone else.
But where, I'd still like to ask, does this persistent impulse for online verbal barbarism (whether related to refugees, race, gender or sexual orientation) come from? Is it because it feels easy and consequence-free? Is it the rule of the mob?
\"The destructiveness of the crowd is often mentioned as its most conspicuous quality, and there is no denying the fact that it can be observed everywhere, in the most diverse countries and civilizations,\" wrote the Bulgarian-born German author Elias Canetti in Crowds and Power, his book from 1960 that would help him win a Nobel Prize.
\"The crowd particularly likes destroying houses and objects: breakable objects like window panes, mirrors, pictures and crockery.\"
And, it turns out, the resolve of teenage refugees.
I'm no clairvoyant. I don't know how Mohamad will turn out as an adult. He might out-peacenik Gandhi or purge with a Stalinist zeal.
For now, he's a sweet kid, smart, respectful. He has retained an unfathomable sense of optimism despite having spent the last five years of the Syrian war living either directly or indirectly amid things that childhood was not engineered for: torture, starvation, family corpses, constant domestic upheaval.
\"Thanks so much,\" Mohamad messaged me on Facebook after I informed him that USA TODAY had published a new story about him.
No subtext.
Hjelmgaard is a Berlin-based correspondent for USA TODAY.
Credit: , @khjelmgaard, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Kim Hjelmgaard, USA TODAY
Word count: 712
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
