"The dead have few if any rights (well, other than a dead celebrity in California), but Apple, and an array of left-wing supporters, are defending the rights of the San Bernardino terrorist shooters not to have their iPhones searched. (The particular phone in question was the property of the employer of Syed Rizwan Farook, the husband in the duo.)
The FBI, in possession of the dead shooter's phone, has been stymied in its efforts to break into the device by a doomsday mechanism that wipes the phone after multiple unsuccessful password tries. The FBI has requested, and now a court has ordered, Apple to disable this doomsday feature, allowing the FBI to try as many combinations as necessary. Apple responded with a public letter from CEO Tim Cook, saying such a move would put all its users at personal risk, and that it would appeal the ruling. Donald Trump thereupon jumped in to ask just exactly who Apple thinks it is.
In this, Trump has once again raised the obvious issue: How did Apple become responsible for our security?
The FBI is presumably looking for other bad guys who Farook and Tashfeen Malik may have plotted or communicated with. But Apple's Cook in his letter quickly dismissed that as a small potatoes issue and threw a blanket of principle over any efforts by law enforcement to mess with the iPhone or, it seems, any encryption methods at all. Apple, Cook insisted, is protecting our security while the FBI is undermining it.
This is part of the Snowden effect, a view of the world that emerged after former NSA contractor Edward Snowden released stolen documents showing the extent of the government's data collection -- much of it through cellphones. In this new world, not only does the government's interest in data and its access to technology have vast, if unspecified, conspiratorial implications, but it is one in which technology companies, if they are found to have offered any assistance, get awfully bad press.
Extending Apple some sort of benefit of the doubt, it is not clear whether the company truly sees itself as an ultimate protector and enforcer of a new tech order, existing beyond the capabilities of courts and government authority to regulate, or if it is, in the Snowden age, just doing some proactive PR and marketing.
It's certainly quite a melodramatic and chest beating letter, not to mention a fairly preposterous one.
Instead of limiting the issue to the two dead shooters and, merely, accommodating the FBI by providing the data on the phone in question, Apple has elevated the FBI's demand to \"dangerous precedent,\" deeming it the first domino in a sequence that would, in Apple's telling, make everybody's phone transparent to all the world's bunko artists, sleazebags and brigands.
Said Cook: \"The government suggests this tool could only be used once, on one phone. But that's simply not true. Once created, the technique could be used over and over again, on any number of devices. In the physical world, it would be the equivalent of a master key, capable of opening hundreds of millions of locks -- from restaurants and banks to stores and homes. No reasonable person would find that acceptable.\"
Actually, the government is saying it will use this as entree to only one phone. That it \"could\" be used widely and as a universal pass key is entirely theoretical. The government, Cook goes on, \"could extend this breach of privacy and demand that Apple build surveillance software to intercept your messages, access your health records or financial data, track your location, or even access your phone's microphone or camera without your knowledge.\"
That's the nub of the argument and of Apple's agitprop. The government is the enemy, even the operative villain in modern life, perfidiously or mindlessly intent on taking away the privacy of its citizens. Technology companies, on the other hand, have created all manner of tools to protect our privacy.
Snowden, whose theft and escape were enabled by encryption protocols, has been an active tweeter on the side of Apple in the current debate. Snowden, perhaps honorably but quite mindlessly, too, showed both how communication devices potentially compromise our privacy and, as well, how would-be terrorists might circumvent such exposure and protect their dastardly plans. In response, technology companies must grandly assert the virtue of their devices, and law enforcement must dig deeper into them.
Illustration
photo AP
Word count: 768
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
