"CORRECTION APPENDED. BRUSSELS -- The attacks on the airport and a subway station in Brussels on Tuesday have intensified questions about the Belgian authorities' ability to thwart terror in the city. This article, published on Monday, examines how the lone surviving suspect from the Paris terror attacks in November managed to elude capture for months afterward.
For 125 days, the authorities in Belgium had failed to find Salah Abdeslam, the most wanted man in Europe, though they strongly believed he was holed up in or near the insular immigrant section of Brussels where he had grown up.
They raided dozens of homes in the neighborhood, known as Molenbeek, as they hunted down Mr. Abdeslam, one of the 10 men suspected of carrying out the Nov. 13 terrorist attacks in Paris and the only one still alive. They rounded up his friends and fellow drug dealers and thieves, and interrogated members of his family.
They thought one night that they might have him cornered, but were paralyzed by a law prohibiting nighttime raids. When they moved in the next morning, he was nowhere to be seen. They deployed a drone to help in the hunt. Clues to Mr. Abdeslam's continued presence, including his fingerprints, started to seem more mocking than tantalizing.
Then, last week, the police got at least two breaks -- one a result of efforts to monitor Mr. Abdeslam's cellphone use, the other possibly through shoe-leather surveillance -- that allowed them to bring the manhunt to a close.
In the end, Mr. Abdeslam was captured coming out of a building only 100 yards from where, the police believe, he had hidden immediately after fleeing Paris four months ago and barely a 10-minute walk from his mother's house, raising further questions about the well-documented shortcomings of Belgium's counterterrorism efforts.
Yet the case has also brought to life the extreme challenge this country faces in addressing the threat from Islamists living in the heart of the European Union's capital city, as well as the problems that security officials face in penetrating Muslim cultures imported wholesale into Western societies. And it has left some unresolved mysteries in its wake, not least whether Mr. Abdeslam was a frightened young man who got in over his head or a determined terrorist who continued to plot further assaults up until he was captured.
Mr. Abdeslam, 26, handled logistics for the Paris attackers. He was the fixer, renting cars, finding apartments, picking people up and dropping them off. Like his brother Ibrahim -- who was among the attackers and blew himself up in a Paris cafe -- he was supposed to die on Nov. 13. Instead, Salah Abdeslam, who told the police that he had wanted to blow himself up at the national soccer stadium north of Paris, lost his nerve and, according to French investigators, made a panicked call to friends in Brussels asking to be picked up and taken home in the hours after the attack, before the authorities learned his identity.
The neighborhood he returned to, Molenbeek, is a working-class district, where mosques outnumber churches, cafes specialize in scalding hot tea vibrant with fresh mint and many women wear hijab. Mr. Abdeslam's Molenbeek was an even more insular sub-community, made up of small-time drug dealers and petty criminals, unemployed young men with few prospects.
It was this Molenbeek that sustained him before and after the attacks. Much of Mr. Abdeslam's life was spent within a mile of his mother's house. A half-hour walk away was the bar he and Ibrahim ran until it was closed just two weeks before the attacks. It was a place where young men traded in illegal drugs, drank tea and watched extremist videos of fighting in Syria.
Many of the first- and second-generation immigrants in Molenbeek, especially those living near a canal that separates the district from wealthier central Brussels, have roots, like the Abdeslam family, in Morocco. One of the busiest shops in the area has pay telephone booths for long-distance calls and computers because some Molenbeek residents cannot afford international calling plans or Internet service.
It can seem at times as if a community has migrated to Belgium with its customs, loyalties and language intact, putting a premium on family ties and fostering an insularity that made finding Mr. Abdeslam that much harder. Johan Leman, an anthropologist who works in Molenbeek, said the atmosphere resembled the culture of omertà, the code of silence followed by the Mafia.
Upon his return from Paris, the authorities said, Mr. Abdeslam went underground, hidden by friends and family, staying mostly in the area but moving around and relying on others to bring him food.
\"It was a pre-existing network that came together to do small time trafficking or other things and it was at least partly used to help in Salah Abdeslam's flight,\" Frédéric Van Leeuw, the Belgium federal prosecutor, said on Belgian television on Saturday.
But Mr. Abdeslam also retained close links while in hiding to other men who appear to have been involved in planning the Paris attacks and possibly trained by the Islamic State in Syria. That association suggests Mr. Abdeslam may not have given up on engaging in further terrorist activities, and that the militants in Belgium had not yet dismissed him as unwilling to give his life for their cause.
The turning point in the case came last week when the police raided an apartment about six miles from Molenbeek, seeking clues but believing it to be empty.
Instead, they were met with gunfire. They killed the gunman, Mohamed Belkaid, a 35-year-old Algerian who had already been linked to the Paris plot. But two men escaped. And when the police entered the apartment, they found large quantities of ammunition, an Islamic State flag -- and Mr. Abdeslam's fingerprints.
\"There was no electricity, no water, no gas,\" said Ahmed El Khannouss, the deputy mayor of Molenbeek. \"He was living in catastrophically unhygienic conditions.\"
Convinced that Mr. Abdeslam had slipped away, the authorities intensified their hunt. Around the same time, Mr. Abdeslam appears to have made a big mistake, using a cellphone known to the authorities that he had not used for some time, said Pieter Van Ostaeyen, an expert on extremist networks in Belgium.
\"It was basically because Salah Abdeslam activated his cellphone and the number was known to the police and then they knew his location geographically,\" Mr. Van Ostaeyen said.
On Thursday, Ibrahim Abdeslam was buried in an unmarked grave in an ecumenical cemetery in Brussels, nearly 18 weeks after his death. The short funeral service took place under heavy surveillance, and the 20 men who attended it were identified and most likely being watched by the authorities from then on if they were not already, neighbors said.
Among the attendees was Abid Aberkan, who Mr. El Khannouss said was a cousin of the Abdeslam brothers. It was to a Molenbeek apartment used by Mr. Aberkan's family that Mr. Abdeslam went at some point after the raid. And on Friday, the police targeted that apartment in a raid that ended when Mr. Abdeslam sprinted into the street from the doorway, wearing a hoodie; he was shot in the leg by the police and taken into custody.
What finally gave Mr. Abdeslam away, a spokesman for the Paris prosecutor's office said, was a combination of \"telephony and surveillance.\"
Mr. Abdeslam began talking to interrogators over the weekend, and France is seeking his extradition. It remains unclear how ideologically committed he was to the Islamic State, the terrorist group also known as ISIS and ISIL. His role went unmentioned in the organization's social media propaganda after the Paris attacks. There is no evidence that he tried to get to Syria. Mr. El Khannouss, the Molenbeek deputy mayor, described him as someone \"trying to fill shoes that were too big for him.\"
Yet up until his capture, Mr. Abdeslam appears to have been among more hardened jihadists. Mr. Belkaid, the Algerian killed in the gunfight with the police, is suspected of wiring money to help finance the Paris plot.
As the police were capturing Mr. Abdeslam on Friday, they were arresting a man whose real name they do not know yet, but since they also found false papers during the raid in the name of Amine Choukri and another set in the name of Monir Ahmed Alaaj, it is possible that he was using one or both of those names.
Mr. Abdeslam, who traveled to Budapest twice last fall before the Paris attacks to pick up several men at a time when tens of thousands of undocumented migrants were streaming through Europe each week, was stopped by the police in October in Germany with a man traveling under the name Amine Choukri.
On Monday, the Belgian authorities identified another man they suspect of being an accomplice of Mr. Abdeslam's: Najim Laachraoui, 24, a Belgian citizen who went to Syria in February 2013. Mr. Laachraoui, using the name Soufiane Kayal, was one of two men -- Mr. Belkaid was the other -- with fake Belgian identity cards who were with Mr. Abdeslam on Sept. 9 as they passed through a checkpoint between Hungary and Austria.
In Molenbeek's teahouses, it is hard to get anyone to say much about Mr. Abdeslam or his capture. Men walk outside rather than speak to outsiders.
That does not make them jihad supporters, said Mr. Leman, the anthropologist. \"Even if they disapprove of what someone did in family,\" he said, \"they feel it should be dealt with internally.\"
Correction: May 19, 2016, Thursday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: A picture on March 22 with an article about the way in which Salah Abdeslam, the lone surviving suspect from the Paris terror attacks in November, managed to elude capture for months afterward was published in error. It showed Najim Laachraoui, believed to have made the bombs used in the Paris and Brussels attacks -- not Mr. Abdeslam. The error was pointed out shortly after publication, but editors failed to follow through with a print correction.
Credit: ALISSA J. RUBIN; Milan Schreuer and Aurelien Breeden contributed reporting from Brussels, and Lilia Blaise from Paris.
Photograph
Police Officers in the Molenbeek District of Brussels On Friday As They Closed in On Salah Abdeslam, One of 10 Suspects in the Nov. 13 Terrorist Attacks in Paris and the Last One Who Is Still Alive. (Photograph by Geert Vanden Wijngaert/Associated Press); Authorities Call Mr. Abdeslam the Fixer in the Paris Attacks. (Photograph by Belgium Federal Police, Via Epa Belgium Federal Police, Via Epa)
Word count: 1780
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 22, 2016"
