"Al-Qaeda killed my friend.
The headlines are cold and harsh: Leila Alaoui, 33, a photographer, killed in the Burkina Faso terrorist attack. They are straightforward, and I feel disconnected to them -- as if they're talking about someone I don't know.
I have been working as a reporter for almost a decade -- reporting on tragedies such as the Nov. 13 Paris terrorist attacks, always with some sort of distance. I never thought about what it would be like for me if the tragedy du jour hit so close to home.
I can tell you, nothing will ever be the same.
As I went to her funeral last week, I thought about how Leila and I met when we were little, but also how we only became friends as teenagers. I thought about how I liked the idea that we didn't become friends because we grew up in the same circle but because we chose to become friends.
And I thought about her: the daughter of a Moroccan man and a French woman, who was born in Paris but grew up in Marrakech in an extremely open-minded and tolerant home. I thought about how she these days lived in Paris and Beirut, where she and her partner Nabil Canaan opened the beautiful art space \"Station.\" And I thought about how she and I were so similar but also so different. She was so full of life and so optimistic. She never thought that anything was difficult, much less impossible.
Leila worked on making sense of the art of crossing borders. She had a French passport and was able to travel easily. She was always fascinated by people who risked their lives to travel. Her most famous work is \"The Moroccans,\" a series of photos of people she met while traveling all over Morocco -- she was inspired by Robert Frank's \"The Americans.\" But there is so much more.
After finishing her bachelor's degree at City College of New York, she moved back to Morocco and worked on a fantastic project on those here who attempt to get to Spain illegally by boat. She was the first artist to dive into the plight of Sub-Saharan migrants in Morocco who were facing extreme police brutality and everyday racism. Not only did she spend hours recording their testimonies, she also helped them get medical care and find the money to survive -- she pushed for an awareness campaign on their predicament.
She also reported on the refugee crisis in Lebanon, Jordan and Iraqi Kurdistan. It was effortless for her to go to all these places, and I think that she was always oblivious to the risks she was taking. I recently reported in Calais in northern France on the refugee crisis. I was planning to return with Leila.
On Jan. 15, she texted her family that she loved Burkina Faso, a country that felt safe. Later that day, driving back from a photo shoot, she stepped out of the car to buy food at the Cappuccino restaurant. She found herself face-to-face with a terrorist holding a machine gun. The terrorist shot her three times.
Her brother Soulaimane Alaoui texted me: \"Leila got shot, she is undergoing surgery right now.\" And like many, many, others, whose loved ones were caught in the attack on the restaurant, and the nearby Splendid Hotel, I waited.
She fought for her life for days before dying Jan. 18.
Leila represents everything these terrorists hate. She was free, she was happy, she loved life and was full of compassion and hope for the world.
Leila lived for her art, but she didn't like to think of herself as an artist but rather as a documentarian. Her face has also been all over the news, people who never met her wept for her on social media. She's becoming one of the symbols of all these innocent lives that we have lost to terrorism.
While I don't know how to stop the violence, I think the biggest gift we can give her is to allow her legacy to live forever: Never forget the underdogs she captured in her photos and honor her memory by living fully and happily. I am shattered by all this -- but I will try.
Alami is a journalist based in Paris and Marrakech.
Illustration
photo FADEL SENNA, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 758
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
