"Iraq's urgent need for more police officers to secure neighborhoods in Ramadi and other cities freed from Islamic State control is expected to be a priority of Defense Secretary Ashton Carter's when he meets next month with allies in Brussels, officials said Monday.
Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi requested the trainers when he met with Carter at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. Carter plans to press allies to supply more. Carabiniere, Italian paramilitary police, are leading the training and have put 1,138 Iraqi officers through training courses. Nearly 1,000 more are receiving instruction.
The Italians have 95 carabiniere trainers in Iraq, and are sending 15 more to the northern city of Irbil to open a training unit there. The Italians have helped field effective forces, but Carter wants other countries to contribute trainers as well, said a senior Defense official who spoke on condition of anonymity because the official was not authorized to speak publicly.
The Pentagon views trained local police as key to the effort to wrest control of Iraqi towns from fighters from the Islamic State, or ISIL, and to maintain order. ISIL fighters swept across large blocs of Iraq in 2014, seizing major cities such as Mosul and Ramadi as Iraqi soldiers and police fled with little resistance. Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city after Baghdad, remains occupied by ISIL forces.
Just as critical will be keeping the force non-sectarian, said Michael O'Hanlon, a military analyst at the Brookings Institution. ISIL emerged, in part, because of Sunni persecution by the Shiite-led government of former prime minister Nouri al-Maliki.
\"Having 100,000 well-trained police is crucial if cities like Ramadi and ultimately Mosul are to be not just liberated but kept away from ISIL,\" O'Hanlon said. \"And the police are recruited locally, so they are generally seen as more legitimate than the army.\"
Credit: Tom Vanden Brook, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Karim Kadim, AP
Word count: 340
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
