"The ambush that left five police officers dead at a protest in Dallas on Thursday has altered the contours of the presidential campaign, with Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump canceling political events on Friday and striking different tones about the killings.
Mr. Trump called the episode \"an attack on our country\" and Mrs. Clinton used it as evidence of the need for \"more love and kindness.\"
\"We must stand in solidarity with law enforcement, which we must remember is the force between civilization and total chaos,\" Mr. Trump said in a video statement that his campaign released to TV networks on Friday evening.
He also alluded to the two black men, Alton B. Sterling in Baton Rouge, La., and Philando Castile in Falcon Heights, Minn., who were killed by white police officers earlier this week.
\"Every American has the right to live in the safety and peace,\" Mr. Trump said. \"We will make America safe again.\"
In an interview with CNN, Mrs. Clinton praised the slain Dallas officers and called the attack \"an absolutely horrific event.\"
She promptly brought the conversation back to the shootings of Mr. Castile and Mr. Sterling, which were recorded in graphic videos that reignited outrage and debate over the treatment of black men by white police officers.
\"We've got to do everything possible to support our police and to support innocent Americans who have encounters with police,\" Mrs. Clinton said. She vowed to fight \"systemic racism\" in police departments and to better train law enforcement officials and integrate them into the communities they serve.
She also called on white Americans to empathize with African-Americans who live in fear of clashes with the police. \"We're the ones who have to start listening to the legitimate cries that are coming from our African-American fellow citizens,\" Mrs. Clinton said.
On Friday morning, Mrs. Clinton offered condolences to the families of the police officers killed in Dallas.
\"I mourn for the officers shot while doing their sacred duty to protect peaceful protesters, for their families and all who serve with them,\" Mrs. Clinton posted on Twitter.
She postponed a rally with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. in Scranton, Pa., that had been scheduled for Friday. But she did address the shootings of Mr. Sterling and Mr. Castile, and the Dallas attacks, at a conference of the African Methodist Episcopal Church in Philadelphia, where emotions were raw on Friday afternoon.
\"There is too much violence, too much hate, too much senseless killing, too many people dead who shouldn't be,\" Mrs. Clinton told the group.
She said she knew she would upset some people by calling for an overhaul of the criminal justice system while praising law enforcement officials. \"But all these things can be true at once,\" she said.
I mourn for the officers shot while doing their sacred duty to protect peaceful protesters, for their families & all who serve with them. -H -- Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) July 8, 2016
On Friday morning, Mr. Trump asked the New York Police Department if he could address an afternoon roll call at a Midtown Manhattan precinct to show solidarity with the police, but the department denied his request, according to the police commissioner, William J. Bratton.
\"Our interest is in staying out of the politics of the moment, not to provide photo-ops,\" Mr. Bratton said during a news conference at Police Headquarters in Manhattan.
A spokesman for Mr. Trump, Jason Miller, said neither the candidate nor anyone from the campaign had requested a roll call appearance.
The events in Dallas came weeks after the attack on a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., which forced both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump to address bigotry, homegrown terrorism and gun violence.
The attack on Thursday has now added urgency for both candidates and their parties to address racial divisions in the country while showing support for its law enforcement officials.
Mrs. Clinton made criminal justice reform and improving relations between police forces and black communities central to her Democratic primary campaign, calling for an end to the \"era of mass incarceration.\" She often appeared at campaign events with the mothers of black men killed in clashes with the police.
Appearing alongside Mr. Biden would have complicated that message.
The vice president enjoys a close bond with police officers, but he also played a central role in enacting the 1994 Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act. That legislation, signed into law by President Bill Clinton, put more police officers on the streets, built dozens of new prisons and created tougher penalties for drug offenders. It has been widely criticized as having an adverse impact on black communities and the high levels of incarceration, arrest, and police presence that have contributed to the current tensions.
Mrs. Clinton has not put as much emphasis on the issue of criminal justice in the general election campaign. That approach is expected to change after the deaths of Mr. Castile and Mr. Sterling and the killings in Dallas.
If Mr. Trump intended to project a measured reaction to the shootings, his campaign's state chairman in Virginia, Corey Stewart, went sharply in a different direction.
Mr. Stewart, who is also reported to be planning a run for governor in Virginia in 2017, posted on Facebook as news of the shooting was developingking, explicitly blaming Mrs. Clinton for the deaths.
\"Liberal politicians who label police as racists -- specifically Hillary Clinton and Virginia Lt. Governor Ralph Northam -- are to blame for essentially encouraging the murder of these police officers tonight,\" Mr. Stewart wrote in a post that he later deleted.
Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for the Trump campaign, said that \"Corey does not speak for the campaign and this is not something we agree with.\"
Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.
Credit: AMY CHOZICK; Reporting was contributed by Maggie Haberman, Nicholas Corasaniti, Matt Flegenheimer and J. David Goodman.
Photograph
Hillary Clinton Spoke About Recent Violence On Friday at a Conference of the African Methodist Episcopal Church in Philadelphia. \"There Is Too Much Hate,\" She Told the Crowd. In a Statement, Donald J. Trump Promised, \"We Will Make America Safe Again.\" (Photographs by Al Drago/the New York Times; Ty Wright for the New York Times)
Word count: 1076
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 9, 2016"
