"BURNS, Ore. -- The courthouse is still blocked by concrete bollards. Tires have been slashed. Family members and old friends have argued and refused to speak again. Fights have broken out in church.
The occupation at a wildlife refuge near here by a band of outsiders -- 11 of them have been arrested and one killed, and four remain in the compound -- has turned this patch of small-town America into a community at war with itself. Rather than uniting the hamlet of Burns around a common cause, the rebellion at the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge by anti-government protesters has exposed divisions among residents, some who support federal regulation of public land and others who bristle at Washington's sway.
The tumultuous events of the occupation -- still not over after 27 days -- have left divisions that residents said would not soon heal, even after the drama ends and the world's attention shifts.
\"This county is so tore up, it will never be the same -- ever,\" said Jeff Dixson, 68, a wildlife photographer and former truck driver who said he supported many of the occupiers' goals, making him unpopular with many neighbors. \"There's a lot of people that have told me they ain't never going to talk to me again.\"
Since Jan. 2, the tiny community of Burns -- the seat of sprawling Harney County, which has a population of a little more than 7,000 -- has played host to a protest movement it never requested: a band of armed cowboys from other states who took over the government-run wildlife sanctuary about 30 miles away, saying they wanted to liberate it from the government's yoke.
The protesters, led by the brothers Ammon and Ryan Bundy, who were arrested Tuesday, turned the nature preserve and research center into a bunker, one that drew sympathizers with impressive weaponry from around the country. One occupier, LaVoy Finicum, was shot dead Tuesday in the same encounter with the police that led to the surrender of the Bundys and others. The last four holdouts at Malheur, three men and a woman, are negotiating with the F.B.I., but at least one of them has said he would rather die than give up.
On Friday, 10 of the defendants appeared in Portland before a federal magistrate, who ordered the Bundy brothers and three others to remain in custody. The judge signed orders that would release two other defendants once the occupation ended, and delayed decisions on three others.
The arguments that broke out locally after the seizure of the refuge feel almost quaint now, people here say: Were the ideology and tactics of the occupiers valid? Many people supported the goals of the protesters -- the return of federal lands to local or private control, and the release from prison of two local ranchers convicted of arson -- but disapproved of the standoff.
As things dragged on, the questions and fears got darker. Were the F.B.I. and other law enforcement agencies doing the right thing? Were the sympathizers streaming into town -- guns on their hips -- specters of intimidation or of comfort?
On Thursday, the F.B.I. released a video showing State Police troopers shooting Mr. Finicum, 54, after he tried to drive around a roadblock and they said he reached for his gun. The authorities hoped the video would quell accusations that Mr. Finicum was gunned down with his hands up, but many citizens who watched it do not accept the F.B.I.'s account of what happened.
\"It is absolutely another dividing line with one side saying it was coldblooded murder and the other side is saying it was completely justified,\" said Linsay Tyler, 33, a rancher who was born and raised in the county.
Ms. Tyler thought Mr. Finicum's death was unjustified, but stopped short of calling it murder. She said the shooting had been like gasoline on a fire. \"It was a community divided throughout the whole occupation, but now it's even more divided,\" she said. \"Families are being torn apart, friendships are being ended -- it's a nightmare.\"
Linda Gainer, 63, who runs a cafe about six miles from the refuge, has received criticism for letting occupiers buy food.
\"People say that we're unpatriotic, we're terrorists,\" Ms. Gainer said.
\"You shouldn't go around and say nasty things about people just because you don't agree on something,\" she added.
Some residents are simply leaving. The 17 employees of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge were relocated by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, which received \"nonspecific\" threats about its workers being taken hostage, said Jason Holm, a spokesman for the agency, which runs the refuge.
One Malheur employee, speaking anonymously to protect his safety, said he was living apart from his wife and young children. His family has lived in the area for decades, he said, but is considering moving for good. \"It makes us very angry,\" he said.
The Harney County sheriff, Dave Ward, who has been a vocal opponent of the occupation, said the tires of his wife's vehicle were slashed, prompting her to leave town. The authorities are investigating the matter.
Four top public officials have resigned since the occupation: the county school superintendent, the principals of the county middle and high schools, and the head of the fire department. The fire chief, Chris Briels, is a supporter of the occupation, and resigned when other officials refused to allow the Bundy group to a host a meeting in town.
Ranchers, environmentalists, birders, Native Americans and federal officials have long tussled over the use of public land in Harney County, just as people have in other communities across the West. But in recent years, residents have come together to create a land use plan for the refuge's nearly 188,000 acres, winning praise from the Interior secretary, Sally Jewell, who called the plan a model.
The Malheur occupation has broken down that spirit of cooperation, said Vanessa Leathers-King, 33, whose great-great-grandfather was the first in her family to ranch in the county. She opposed illegal action at the refuge, while agreeing with the occupiers' critique about government overreach.
But that was enough, Ms. Leathers-King said, for some of her neighbors to label her an occupation supporter. She pulled her son out of school after students bullied him for being a \"Bundy-lover,\" and he is now taking classes online.
\"I have not been to church the past three Sundays,\" Ms. Leathers-King said. \"I'm worried about how I'll be received there.\"
Credit: JULIE TURKEWITZ and KIRK JOHNSON; Colin Miner contributed reporting from Portland, Ore.
Photograph
Top, a Ranch Near the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Oregon. Above, Linda Gainer Owns the Narrows, a Cafe About Six Miles From the Refuge. She Was Criticized for Serving Everyone Involved in the Standoff, Including Protesters. \"People Say That We're Unpatriotic, We're Terrorists,\" Ms. Gainer Said. (Photographs by Jarod Opperman for the New York Times)
Word count: 1167
Copyright New York Times Company Jan 30, 2016"
