"Joe Quinn is speaking. His brother Jimmy died on 9/11. The sun is shining from a clear sky, as it was that day. I am on the treadmill listening to music, watching images of the memorial service on the 15th anniversary of the attack on America. I pull the headphone plug out of my iPod and insert it in the treadmill jack.
The voice is strong. After his brother's death Quinn was inspired to serve, doing tours in Iraq and Afghanistan. He recalls the national unity that followed the loss of 2,977 lives in the 9/11 attacks, 2,753 of them at New York's twin towers, and notes the disunity that seems to have become the American condition since then.
\"Don't believe it,\" Quinn says.
No, don't believe it. Suspend all doubt and rancor. Of the 2,753 victims in New York, no identifying trace of 1,113 was ever found, according to the medical examiner's office. If it has been required of so many to make their peace with such absence, it behooves us all to lift our gazes beyond Yeats's \"weasels fighting in a hole.\"
Don't believe in American disunity. Believe in the daily fashioning and refashioning of America, its constant reinvention and its high idealism. Believe that, as Lincoln said, \"government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth\" -- and recall the onerous sacrifice over generations for that cause.
There are always politicians who, as the German Social Democrat Kurt Schumacher noted in a speech to the Reichstag in Berlin in 1932, make \"a continuous appeal to the inner swine\" of people by \"ceaselessly mobilizing human stupidity.\" Fear is the fertile soil in which such appeals propagate. The past year in the United States has demonstrated that. Resist fear. It is a distorting lens.
Some people jumped from the burning towers. I see them still. The choices we face may seem difficult. They are not.
Fifteen years. Time does not fly. Time eddies, accelerates, slows down and turns back on itself. A sob wells up in me as I watch Quinn.
I am staring again, a couple of days after the attack, at a photograph of a pregnant woman's ultrasound tacked to a subway wall: \"Looking for the father of this child.\"
There are a lot of children aged 14 and a half who love but never saw their dads.
The commemoration service proceeds through name after name that evoke every corner of the earth, every creed. People who tried to get out of the towers and people who went into the towers to help them. A New Yorker is born every day from the acceptance this city offers.
Now I am back on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, near the East River, just before 9:00 a.m. on Sept. 11, 2001, having dropped my son off at school. I am driving, stopped at a traffic light, and a guy on a motorbike leans over and says, \"Hey, look, the World Trade Center is on fire.\"
Smoke billows from the north tower. As I turn right toward Brooklyn Heights, where my family is in a temporary apartment having just moved from Berlin, I feel a boom and shudder as United Airlines Flight 175 from Boston crashes into the south tower at 9:03 a.m.
It is my daughter Adele's fourth birthday (\"Dad,\" she will say years later, \"my birthday's famous but I'm not.\"). It is my third week back in the United States. It is my first day in a new job as foreign editor.
I board a No. 2 subway headed for Times Square. All bridges and tunnels into Manhattan are closed at 9:21 a.m.; this must have been the last train to run. A woman beside me is crying. I try to console her. She believes her brother is in one of the towers. I reach my desk in time to see the south tower collapse at 9:59 a.m.
There follows the alchemy of newspapering, diverse talents fusing under pressure, to make that headline -- \"U.S. Attacked\" -- and that remarkable paper of Sept. 12 with its lead story by my colleague Serge Schmemann that began:
\"Hijackers rammed jetliners into each of New York's World Trade Center towers yesterday, toppling both in a hellish storm of ash, glass, smoke and leaping victims, while a third jetliner crashed into the Pentagon in Virginia.\"
I emerged late that evening onto Times Square. There was nobody. Not a soul. I started to walk beneath the neon signs.
\"Put one foot in front of the other,\" says Quinn. Turn off your TV. Power down your phone, say Hi to your neighbor, and introduce yourself to a stranger. Connect. Be the unity you seek.
The fires burned for weeks. The acrid sweet smell below Houston Street persisted. Papers from the towers fluttered across the East River toward Brooklyn. I picked one up and found on it -- or did I imagine them? -- these lines from Samuel Beckett: \"Ever tried. Ever failed. No matter. Try again. Fail again. Fail better.\"
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
AuthorAffiliation
ROGER COHEN You can follow me on Twitter or join me on Facebook.
Word count: 896
Copyright New York Times Company Sep 13, 2016"
