"BURNS, Ore. -- Remote Western towns, in midwinter's grip, definitely have some romance to them. But this one has become a circus tent: A giddy but tense crush of humanity has descended here in rural eastern Oregon, benefiting businesses and swamping them, filling bars, and making motel rooms unattainable amid a bizarre tide of guns, police, reporters and ideologues quoting (at length) from the United States Constitution.
That's Burns.
There is no question things have been rough here. The armed occupation that began on Jan. 2 at the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge outside town has dragged on, and tensions heightened last week with the fatal shooting of one of the most visible occupiers, LaVoy Finicum, by Oregon State Police troopers in an arrest that went bad.
The place is just crazily overrun. Every motel room within 70 miles is taken. Barstools are packed at the Central Pastime Tavern, with journalists and armed antigovernment protesters elbow to elbow, tucking down I.P.A.s and perhaps -- for braver souls -- the bull testicles on the bar menu. Hard to know, but there are probably also undercover F.B.I. agents now and then playing pool in the back, trying to appear like locals in boots and jeans under the mounted bighorn sheep and buffalo heads.
Residents have argued with each other over what to think about the occupiers and their goals, and they have wounded one another in the process.
Anxieties could ratchet up again this week, with a protest planned for Monday at the Harney County courthouse by self-styled patriot groups angry about Mr. Finicum's death. The United States Marshals Office also said Sunday that one of the 11 people arrested in the standoff -- Shawna Cox -- had been released, though the authorities would not provide other details. A judge had previously said Ms. Cox could not leave custody until the occupation had ended.
But here's the thing: For the most part, Burns has not stopped being warm and welcoming to outsiders, even as that has become harder to do. If you were going to spend nearly the entire month of January in a town of about 2,000 people -- isolated by distance in the high eastern Oregon desert, and often with bad weather to boot -- you could do a lot worse.
\"We just decided to be kind,\" said Leah Planinz, who owns Glory Days Pizza with her husband, Nick. She was perhaps talking partly about her philosophy, but more specifically about the restaurant's overstuffed brown leather couch in the back near the arcade room.
The Planinzes, who are both in their mid-30s and have three children together, live above the shop. Last week near closing time, a desperate reporter (who does not work for The New York Times) wandered in. A kind woman at a motel across the street who had no vacancies told him that Glory Days had a couch. Was there any possibility, he asked, that he could throw down a sleeping bag?
Of course! The Planinzes initially refused to take any money, though finally they accepted $20.
A similar thing happened at the Sage Country Inn, a farmhouse bed-and-breakfast built in 1907 just down the street. I have been happily holed up there in a camper out back, thanks to the take-in-a-stranger kindness of the inn's owners, Mike and Corinne Huseby. The Husebys typically have one or two guests over the entire month of January and never, until now, imagined offering the camper -- let alone anyone being thrilled about taking it. (On a personal note: The space heaters keep the camper toasty, but a midnight trip to the bathroom in Mr. Huseby's workshop garage can make you wish you hadn't had that I.P.A. at the Pastime.)
Sometimes the cracks show. That's evident at the Narrows R.V. park and cafe, out by the now-closed road into the refuge, where four protesters are holding out. The occupation's jailed leader, Ammon Bundy, has asked the four, in a message through his lawyer, to leave.
But the courthouse protest planned for Monday could raise tensions and intransigence all over again, with at least 200 people expected, according to one organizer. Some of the protesters have made references to the Black Lives Matter movement and plan to carry signs bearing Mr. Finicum's picture and the words \"All Lives Matter.\"
So the world watches and waits. And the Narrows has become an oasis for everyone involved: protesters with AR-15s across their chests, journalists clutching camera gear, Patagonia-clad environmentalists who have come to protest the protest. Everyone uses the same bathrooms and Wi-Fi and eats cheeseburgers at neighboring tables.
And Linda Gainer, 63, who runs the place, has become a kind of mother figure to all. She doles out coffee and breakfast along with phone numbers and directions, chatting with everyone -- politics left and right, no matter -- as her business becomes a tangle of winter jackets, computer cords, firearms and protest signs.
That she welcomes all has become a problem for her. In the early days of the occupation, a local news report implied that Ms. Gainer had donated food to the occupiers. She said the protesters had paid for it, but suddenly found herself slammed with criticism from people -- mostly from beyond Burns -- who accused her of propping up the rebellion.
\"We will never be stopping at your place again,\" wrote one man, a bird enthusiast who promised to organize a boycott. \"My only regret is that we won't be seeing your sweet dog again.\"
\"Please stop feeding the American Terrorists,\" wrote another. And a third: \"You are providing aid to the domestic terrorists that are occupying a federal building near Burns. They should be in jail and so should you.\"
The conflict has left Ms. Gainer and her small staff -- Lori, Anna and Vicki -- frazzled and worried. This was the busiest January they've had. (That's a phrase you hear all around town.) But bird enthusiasts are their lifeblood, and if they boycott (birding season starts next month at the Malheur, when the first migrating sandhill cranes, tundra swans and northern pintails arrive), it could kill the cafe.
\"We're really worried that this business may not stay in business,\" Ms. Gainer said. \"It depends on how the birders react.\"
Sometimes you can hear in a single shouted utterance a bit of the question, or prayer, just under the surface in the tumultuous and strange month of January 2016: What the heck happened? What became of the town I knew, of snowy high desert and empty quiet vistas, where January was the time when you took a breath and said, Yes! I'm here because the world and its fusses are somewhere else.
That shout erupted at the Narrows on a recent afternoon when a surge of lunch orders flooded the kitchen.
Plates and pans clattered. Then a woman's voice cried out, sounding near tears. \"I'm working as fast as I can!\" she shouted, and the room went suddenly still.
Credit: KIRK JOHNSON; Julie Turkewitz contributed reporting from Princeton, Ore.
Photograph
Linda Gainer, Owner of the Narrows, Says the R.V. Park and Cafe Near Burns, Ore., Had Its Busiest January Ever but May Not Survive the Fallout. (Photograph by Jarod Opperman for the New York Times)
Word count: 1230
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 1, 2016"
