"WASHINGTON -- Speaker Paul D. Ryan on Thursday will roll out a national security agenda as part of his effort to shape the Republican Party platform ahead of the presumed nomination of Donald J. Trump for president in July.
The document is long on themes and short on specifics, serving as a potential template to counter some of the more contentious proposals made by Mr. Trump and as a rebuke to the Obama administration. It calls for more vigorous focus on keeping terrorists off American soil, securing borders and building better defenses against cyberthreats.
House Republicans, in a document to be unveiled Thursday morning at the Council on Foreign Relations, charge that the United States is far less safe than when President Obama took office in 2008, and that the nation's stature has diminished. The Republicans also emphasize that security risks are graver than ever. \"America faces the highest terror-threat level since 9/11,\" they wrote.
At the same time, the to-do list put forward by the Republicans in many ways tracks policies and strategies that the Obama administration has had in place for most of the last eight years, though they suggest the White House has not been aggressive enough.
And in some cases, the statements by Republicans are alarmist. One says: \"Extremist groups have opened up new battlegrounds across the world, even turning our own city streets into the front lines. They are on the offensive, sending operatives to our country and radicalizing Americans to launch acts of violence from within.\"
There is scant evidence that the Islamic State or Al Qaeda has successfully established any terror cells in the United States, in the way they have in Europe.
The document emphasizes the need to close \"security vulnerabilities in our transportation and immigration systems\" and \"pressing our allies to better combat terrorist and foreign-fighter travel\" among other steps.
On immigration enforcement and border control, for instance, the Republicans write, \"We need more than just fencing.\" They also cite the need for Border Patrol agents, aerial surveillance and radar -- none of which are new tools.
They do not address the potential financial cost, which could be steep and run up against opposition in their own ranks to increased federal spending. \"Our response must be so overwhelming that it not only halts illicit activity,\" they write, \"but discourages it from ever happening.\"
The draft of the document, provided to The New York Times, says \"the administration has presided over America's retreat\" and accuses Mr. Obama of prematurely drawing down forces in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Republicans urge containing Iran, saying it is building \"a regional empire and we must do all we can to stop it.\" And they urge \"modernizing and solidifying NATO.\"
The House Republican proposal is also somewhat at odds with Mr. Trump. For instance, the Republicans are far less critical of NATO than Mr. Trump, who has called the alliance obsolete and questioned whether the United States should remain a member.
Mr. Ryan's plan says that NATO needs to be modernized and that other countries should be encouraged to increase their military spending, but it does not call for an end to the alliance.
The document also addresses how veterans are treated, an issue that Mr. Trump has repeatedly raised. \"It is vital that Americans have confidence in our national institutions, including the Department of Veterans Affairs and its system of benefits and health care,\" it said.
The document even raised the possibility of creating a new agency to replace it. \"When government agencies fail to provide the care and benefits that are the reason for their existence, alternative streamlined private options must be provided, such as offering greater choice in using community providers for veterans' health care,\" it said.
The document said that \"the V.A. is not sacred, the veteran is.\"
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.
Follow David M. Herszenhorn on Twitter @herszenhorn.
Credit: DAVID M. HERSZENHORN and MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting.
Word count: 687
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 9, 2016"
