"The next major offensive to drive Islamic State militants from Iraq, the fight to recapture the city of Mosul, is at least a year away, a top military intelligence official testified Tuesday.
\"I'm not as optimistic that we'll be able to turn that in the near term,\" Marine Lt. Gen. Vincent Stewart, director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, told the Senate Armed Services Committee. \"Certainly not this year.\"
Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, was captured by the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS, in June 2014, becoming an important propaganda asset for the militant group and a threat to Iraq's sovereignty.
Iraq recently retook control of Ramadi, 65 miles west of Baghdad, from the militants, a move the Pentagon cites as a victory for Iraq's security forces and a sign that U.S.-trained Iraqi troops are progressing.
Mosul, which once had a population of about 1 million, is a more formidable challenge. Thousands of civilians remain in Mosul, it is more than double the size of Ramadi, and the city has a more ethnically diverse population.
Ramadi was secured last December after nearly six months of fighting.
It required about 10,000 Iraqi troops backed by coalition airstrikes.
The Pentagon has said an offensive to retake Mosul will require at least double that number of forces. Many of those troops will be trained or retrained by coalition advisers in Iraq before participating in a Mosul offensive.
Generating a force that size will take time. Some Iraqi forces remain tied down in Ramadi, where militants continue to mount small attacks, and won't be able to be redeployed until most security responsibility in the city can be turned over to local police.
Iraq's military also is conducting other operations in western Iraq that need to be completed before an offensive.
Credit: Jim Michaels, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Karim Kadim, AP Iraqi soldiers train with American and Spanish troops southeast of Baghdad in January.
Word count: 349
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
