"RAEFORD, N.C. -- A decorated Army Reserve officer left bacon at a mosque and brandished a handgun while threatening to kill Muslims, North Carolina authorities said.
The officer, Russell Thomas Langford, 36, also made death threats against members of the mosque, which is about 20 miles southwest of Fayetteville, N.C., the authorities said.
\"He told people at the mosque that he would kill them and bury them behind the mosque,\" Capt. John Kivett of the Hoke County sheriff's office said on Friday. \"He brandished a weapon while he was on the property.\"
Major Langford, who lives in Fayetteville, was charged with ethnic intimidation, assault with a deadly weapon, going armed to the terror of the public, communicating threats, stalking and disorderly conduct, the sheriff's office said.
Major Langford, who works full time in the Army Reserve, served two tours in Iraq while on active Army duty and earned a Bronze Star for \"outstanding dedication to duty during combat\" while with a military police battalion, a spokesman for the Army Reserve said. He has received other decorations, including the Army Good Conduct Medal.
The events that led to Major Langford's arrest began Thursday afternoon when he insulted a mosque member doing construction work near the mosque and then left packages of bacon at the mosque entrance, according to the authorities and witnesses.
Advocacy groups say pork is often used to insult Muslims, whose religion does not allow them to eat it. The Washington-based Council on American-Islamic Relations said the act constituted a desecration of the place of worship.
Witnesses say the suspect left and returned to the Masjid Al Madina mosque several times in his truck, prompting tense moments inside while children were sheltered in the back of the building. The authorities said there were no injuries.
At one point, the suspect followed one member home, resulting in the stalking charge, according to a news release from the sheriff's office. The mosque member tried to evade him but could not.
A law enforcement photograph of Major Langford shows him with close-cropped hair, a tattoo resembling the United States flag on his right forearm and a green shirt emblazoned with a military-style rifle emblem.
The authorities found several handguns and other weapons, plus about 500 rounds of ammunition, in Major Langford's vehicle, Captain Kivett said.
He said Major Langford did not make specific threats about a mass shooting other than to say he wanted to kill mosque members.
Major Langford made his initial court appearance Friday, posted a $60,000 secured bond and was released, Captain Kivett said.
Since posting bond, Major Langford has been placed under the control of his commander on base at Fort Bragg, said a spokesman for the Army Reserve, Capt. Eric Connor. He said that what Major Langford was charged with doing was \"totally contradictory to Army values.\"
About three miles from the mosque, several people at a house listed by the authorities as Major Langford's address declined to comment on Friday.
The alleged threats came during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan.
The Council on American-Islamic Relations asked the authorities to investigate the case as a possible hate crime and to increase patrols around the area, especially during nighttime Ramadan activities.
Before midday prayers on Friday, a patrol car was parked outside the mosque just off a state highway between Fayetteville and Raeford.
The mosque has been there for about three decades.
\"We've never had a problem with anyone,\" said Kamal Allan of Raeford, who said he was confronted at the construction site near the mosque.
Mr. Allan, a general contractor and mosque member, said he was leading a crew tearing down a nearby outbuilding when a man drove up in the late afternoon. Mr. Allan said the man began insulting him and using profanity while asking white crew members, \"Do you know who you're working for?\"
\"I said: 'Don't talk to him. Don't talk to him. Just leave him alone and let the police handle it,\"' Mr. Allan said.
Mohammed Khan, a retired Army officer who served three decades in the military, said he was delivering tables to the mosque when the man drove up. He said he spoke calmly to the man, who spoke angrily and eventually flashed a gun at him.
\"I was kind of dismayed, shocked and in disbelief,\" said Mr. Khan, who still serves as a volunteer Muslim chaplain at Fort Bragg.
\"He told me to go back to my country. I said, 'Which country do you want me to go to? Give me the ticket and I will fly.' He said, 'No, I will not give you a ticket. I will kill you and bury your body right there.\"'
Mr. Khan said the man followed another member of the mosque to that person's home.
Abdu Alsaidi, another mosque member who said he was one of the witnesses, said the police were called in the late afternoon, but Major Langford was not arrested until sometime after 8 p.m.
At one point, while the man was parked in front of the mosque, Mr. Alsaidi said adult members made children move to the back of the building out of fear of an attack.
\"Our life was on the line,\" he said. \"The way he acted, he didn't care about anybody.\"
Credit: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Photograph
Members of the Masjid Al Madina Mosque, Left, in Raeford, N.C., Attended a Service On Friday, a Day After Russell Thomas Langford, an Army Reserve Major, Above, Was Charged with Threatening Them. Mr. Langford Served Two Tours in Iraq While On Active Army Duty, and Received a Bronze Star. (Photographs by Anna Gronewold/Associated Press; Hoke County Sheriff's Office, Via Associated Press)
Word count: 962
Copyright New York Times Company Jun 12, 2016"
