"Stripped of all context, it sounded like an ordinary request for directions.
\"I asked, 'How do I get there?\"' the man testified on Wednesday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
But the man doing the asking was an undercover agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the man doing the answering was the target of a terrorism investigation. And the destination, never mentioned aloud, only insinuated, was Syria, particularly the section controlled by the Islamic State.
That question -- \"How do I get there?\" -- and the answer provided by Tairod Pugh, a 48-year-old airline mechanic who was growing frustrated with his life and enamored with the Islamic State, delivered the most dramatic, but also most enigmatic, moment yet in his trial, which began this week.
Although scores of Americans have been charged with supporting, or trying to support, the Islamic State, Mr. Pugh is one of the first to go to trial.
A former member of the United States Air Force, he flew to Istanbul in January 2015, on what prosecutors described as the first leg in a long journey that he hoped would land him inside Islamic State territory.
His defense lawyers maintain that while Mr. Pugh fantasized about the Islamic State, there is little evidence that he actually set out to join the group. He traveled to Istanbul, they said, not to find passage to neighboring Syria, but to look for work and relax in Turkish bathhouses.
But Mr. Pugh never made it to the bathhouses or the territory of the Islamic State, whichever was his true destination.
Instead he was stopped by Turkish authorities at the Istanbul airport and deported, first to Cairo and then to Kennedy International Airport. There, an undercover F.B.I. agent was waiting for him, pretending to be, like Mr. Pugh, a Muslim traveler pulled out of line and held for further questioning.
\"I was tasked to bump Mr. Pugh, to strike up a conversation and see if he comes across as a radical Muslim,\" said the undercover agent, who testified under a pseudonym, Talib Nassib. \"I normally portray myself as a Sunni, Salafi male convert,\" the agent said, explaining that \"90 percent\" of his undercover work was in counterterrorism cases.
At the government's request, Judge Nicholas G. Garaufis closed the courtroom to the public and news reporters, who listened to an audio feed of the agent's testimony in an empty courtroom nearby.
Sitting near Mr. Pugh in the airport screening room, the agent said that after an initial \"Salaam aleikum,\" the two were soon chatting about family and travel. Later, the men talked at a Dunkin' Donuts kiosk and decided to keep in touch. The conversation took a turn when the agent pulled out his phone and opened Facebook.
Mr. Pugh got a look at the agent's profile page, which depicted black flags of the Islamic State and armed mujahedeen fighters.
\"His demeanor toward me changed,\" the undercover agent testified, recalling how Mr. Pugh loosened up and smiled. \"It was like: Now I know who you are.\"
Soon Mr. Pugh told the undercover agent that \"we're compatible,\" according to a recording of the conversation, much of which was muffled and inaudible. The agent said the \"swooshing\" sounds of the recording were caused by having the recording device under his robes.
Although the men talked for about 20 minutes, it is difficult to follow much of what was said. They spoke in tentative, cryptic sentences, which might suggest that this was a guarded conversation about the Islamic State, but could also suggest that there was some confusion about precisely what they were discussing.
\"You should definitely go, very soon,\" the agent urged at one point, according to a transcript made by the government.
Mr. Pugh responded, \"Go where?\"
The agent testified that he never mentioned Syria or the Islamic State by name, but that it would have been clear to Mr. Pugh what he was getting at. When the agent asked how to get there, Mr. Pugh urged him to shave his beard and wear pants, not a robe. \"The thing is, blend in,\" Mr. Pugh said.
At one point, Mr. Pugh said that his own mistake was wearing a robe. \"I looked like a Muslim,\" Mr. Pugh said.
But was Mr. Pugh talking about getting across Turkey to Syria, or just about how to evade security at the Istanbul airport, where he had recently been detained? When the undercover agent asked Mr. Pugh about his destination, his answer was hardly incriminating.
\"I was going to Turkey,\" Mr. Pugh said, according to the government's transcript.
Word count: 774
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 3, 2016"
