"LASHKAR GAH, Afghanistan -- Long before the mortar shell landed, killing half of Ezzatullah Khan's immediate family, their lives had turned into a cruel and extended race with death.
Mr. Khan's family, which for years had farmed in Helmand Province, first barely survived a brutal drought. Then, the relentless fighting between NATO forces and the Taliban uprooted the family from its ancestral village in the Kajaki District, forcing it from neighborhood to neighborhood in one of the most beaten-up regions of the Afghan war. Brothers, nephews, friends were lost along the way.
About three years ago, Mr. Khan and his family finally settled in what they thought was a refuge: a modest three-bedroom mud house in the Chah-e-Anjir neighborhood, just outside Lashkar Gah, the provincial capital. His family was part of a steady flow of displaced Afghans toward the city, seeking shelter amid the heavy security presence there.
Even as the rest of the province's vast territory kept switching hands, the population constantly trampled, Mr. Khan, who is in his early 30s, felt relatively safe for the first time in years, he said.
Then, last winter, the fighting reached the gates of the provincial capital. Mr. Khan's neighbors began packing up and leaving, one after the other, and he and his family began contemplating yet another move, this time into Lashkar Gah.
The day before they were to leave, the mortar shell hit. About eight months ago -- he does not remember the exact date -- Mr. Khan was sipping tea outside around 2 p.m. when the shell slammed down in the center of the yard. It killed his father, Muhammad Hashim, who was in his 60s; his 22-year-old brother, Raz Muhammad; his wife, also in her 20s; and his daughter Nazia, who was 4.
\"For six days, we lay there in the yard, and no one evacuated us,\" said Mr. Khan, who had been knocked unconscious but found out what had happened from relatives.
Finally, when the fighting subsided a little, Red Cross volunteers took Mr. Khan to the Emergency Hospital in Lashkar Gah, and the family's dead were buried. He was paralyzed from the waist down, and was left with two daughters and a son, the oldest just 7 years old. These days, relatives move him on a stretcher.
\"We can't take care of his stomach, or his medicine, or the orphans left for me,\" said his mother, Khatira, who was away from home during the mortar strike, attending the funeral of a nephew who had been killed days earlier in an explosion.
\"He feels my love for him has changed because he's disabled now,\" she said. \"But I'm doing everything within my power -- I just don't have the ability to get him the medicine.\"
The remnants of the family have moved into the ruins of a historic quarter within Lashkar Gah.
Every time the fighting in Helmand has intensified, an annual occurrence since the departure of international combat troops, it grabs the headlines. News reports remind people that the fall of such a strategic province, where thousands of United States and British forces fought years of tough battles, would be a huge prize for the Taliban. The region's vast opium production, which the insurgents are already tapping into, could further fuel their war machine.
What goes mostly unmeasured is the nonstop suffering inflicted on a people by 15 years of perpetual war. Numbers sometimes surface -- thousands more displaced, hundreds of wounded arriving at the hospitals. But they cannot fully gauge the cost to families forever changed, struggling to cope with daily loss and indignity.
\"Even if dozens die, they just quietly bury them -- no protest, no complaints,\" said Hayatullah Hayat, who took over duties as Helmand's governor about three months ago. \"People are so used to death here that it breaks your heart. They are like earth -- you hear not even a sigh from them.\"
Over 15 years of war, about 22,000 families, totaling more than an estimated 130,000 people, have been displaced within Helmand, many of them repeatedly, according to the Afghan Ministry of Refugees and Repatriation. But Mr. Hayat said that the estimate was very low, and that the actual number could reach as many as 50,000 families.
\"Only due to the recent fighting, in about two weeks, 3,000 to 4,000 families were displaced,\" Mr. Hayat said. \"And we are talking about 15 years.\"
Mr. Hayat said that before the recent fighting, 140 schools were closed in the province, and that the number now probably reached several hundred.
As for casualties, there are no exact numbers of how many people may have been killed or wounded in Helmand Province through the war. There are no ledgers or master lists, just estimates and private grief.
Mr. Khan, for one, had tallied his dearest losses in tattoos on his right arm: his brother Gran and his friend Ghulam Sakhi. For the latest deaths, he doesn't need tattoos. The scars, and his disability, are reminders enough.
Figures from the United Nations, which has systematically tracked civilian casualties in Afghanistan only since 2009, show that southern Afghanistan, with Helmand at the center of the fighting in the region, has been by far the most affected. The agency lists 1,444 civilians killed or wounded across the southern provinces from January to June this year alone.
A visit to the Emergency Hospital in Lashkar Gah, the pre-eminent war surgery center in the province, gives a glimpse of how the flow remains constant. In the first 18 days of August, the hospital registered about 250 wounded patients.
\"There were days when the hospital received up to 37 patients in 24 hours. One day, we had 26 people arrive within two hours,\" Vesna Nestorovic, the hospital's medical coordinator, said about the recent uptick in fighting. \"In recent days, we have had to put some extra beds, just to make sure we are ready to treat the people.\"
For families like Mr. Khan's, caught between the warring sides, their pain is exacerbated by the fact that they rarely know exactly who killed their loved ones.
\"The fighting was happening from both sides. It's not clear whether the mortar was the Taliban's or the authorities',\" Mr. Khan's mother said. \"May God give them both their due.\"
Mr. Khan said, \"I don't really know which side the mortar came from, which would make it so I could gather elders and go to them and say that such cruelty had been committed on me and my family.\"
What has been the value of an Afghan life in Helmand, anyway? The Americans, who made 1,630 condolence payments in Afghanistan between 2005 and 2014, paid an average of $2,985. The British, who settled nearly 5,000 claims of damage and casualties, paid a little less than $4,000 per death.
If it was a Taliban mortar? A spokesman for the insurgency said its compensation for civilian casualties, taken care of by a newly established commission, varied from case to case.
A spokesman for the Helmand provincial administration, Omar Zwak, said the government helped families \"who lost a member or had one injured and are poor and have no male breadwinner.\" They get about $75 a month and some basic food items, such as cooking oil, rice, sugar, beans and flour.
AuthorAffiliation
MUJIB MASHAL and TAIMOOR SHAH Follow Mujib Mashal on Twitter @MujMash .
Credit: MUJIB MASHAL and TAIMOOR SHAH; Mujib Mashal reported from Lashkar Gah and Kabul, Afghanistan, and Taimoor Shah from K andahar, Afghanistan. Mohammad Fahim Abed contributed reporting from Kabul.
Photograph
Ezzatullah Khan Was Paralyzed by a Mortar Shell That Killed His Father, a Brother, His Wife and a Daughter. Earlier, Relentless War Had Uprooted the Family From Its Village in the Kajaki District. (Photograph by Abdul Khaliq for the New York Times) Maps
Word count: 1329
Copyright New York Times Company Aug 21, 2016"
