"The government of Montenegro has expelled 58 foreigners suspected of being associated with Aum Shinrikyo, the Japanese doomsday cult that staged a deadly nerve gas attack on Tokyo's subway in 1995.
The authorities carried out raids in Danilovgrad, a town in central Montenegro, and in Podgorica, the capital, on Friday, after getting a report that \"a certain number of foreign citizens, linked to a certain foreign closed religious group\" were in the country illegally, the Interior Ministry said in a statement.
Of the 58 foreigners, 43 were from Russia, seven from Belarus, four from Japan, three from Ukraine and one from Uzbekistan, the Interior Ministry said. The vast majority had failed to register their stay with the police, as required by law, and they had left the country by Monday night, the Interior Ministry said, without providing details of where they had gone.
During the raids, the government seized several thousand euros in cash and electronic devices, which were taken for forensic analysis.
In a phone interview, Vucko Rovcanin, the owner of the Perjanik Hotel in Danilovgrad, where one of the raids took place, said the group had rented the property for a negotiated rate through an agent. The agent had said they were visiting from Ukraine and needed a place to stay with a fast Internet connection and no staff or other people around, Mr. Rovcanin said.
He said the agent had signed a rental agreement on March 15 and paid in advance. Mr. Rovcanin said the group's members seemed odd but not dangerous. Told about the 1995 attack, he said he had not heard of Aum Shinrikyo.
The Japanese Embassy in Serbia, which covers Montenegro, was informed on Friday that four Japanese citizens had been detained and would be deported, according to the Japanese Foreign Ministry, which said it was looking into the matter.
The Japanese broadcaster NHK reported that the sect was active in Russia and engaged in activities like yoga classes, even though the group is prohibited there. The Russian police raided an Aum Shinrikyo facility in Moscow last October, NHK reported.
Founded in 1984, Aum Shinrikyo formally lost its status as a registered religious group in Japan after the attack but continued its activities, even though the United States and countries classified it as a terrorist organization.
The group declared bankruptcy in 1996, but a successor organization, Aleph, replaced it in 2000. Some member of Aleph created a breakaway group, the Circle of Rainbow Light, in 2007. Both groups are still active.
Thirteen members of the cult, including its founder, Shoko Asahara, were sentenced to death in connection with the subway attack on March 20, 1995, which left 13 people dead and injured thousands. None have been executed, pending legal appeals.
Credit: SEWELL CHAN; Makiko Inoue, Alisa Dogramadzieva and Hisako Ueno contributed reporting.
Photograph
Emergency Workers Tended to the Victims of a Sarin Gas Attack by the Aum Shinrikyo Group in the Tokyo Subway in 1995. (Photograph by Kyodo, Via Associated Press)
Word count: 517
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 30, 2016"
