"WASHINGTON -- An American drone strike in Somalia is believed to have killed a key leader of the Shabab militant group, a United States government official said Friday, as the Obama administration continued its intensified air campaign against the group.
First word of the strike came when the Pentagon press secretary, Peter Cook, said in a statement emailed to reporters that the American military, in cooperation with the government of Somalia, was still assessing whether Thursday's attack had succeeded in killing Hassan Ali Dhoore, described as an important member of the Shabab security and intelligence wing. Defense Department officials said he was involved in two high-profile attacks in Mogadishu more than a year ago in which Americans were killed.
But one United States official, speaking on condition of anonymity to describe initial assessments of the attack, said the military believed that Mr. Dhoore and two others had been killed in the strike, which occurred near Jilib, south of Mogadishu.
In his statement, Mr. Cook said the Shabab leader played a direct role in the Dec. 25, 2014, attack on Mogadishu International Airport, \"resulting in the death of several African Union Mission in Somalia personnel and one U.S. citizen.\" He said Mr. Dhoore was also \"directly responsible\" for the March 2015 attack on the Maka al-Mukarram Hotel in Mogadishu, which resulted in the deaths of 15 people, including one Somali-American. Officials said Mr. Dhoore was also involved in the assassination of a dual-citizen member of the Somali Parliament.
A second Defense Department official said the drone had struck in the early evening hours as Mr. Dhoore, who has been under American surveillance on and off for a considerable time, was riding in a vehicle with two other Shabab members.
Last month, American warplanes struck a training camp belonging to the Shabab just as about 150 fighters were undergoing what Defense Department officials said was a graduation ceremony in preparation for a large-scale attack against United States troops and their regional allies in East Africa.
That strike was the largest attack on the Shabab in the more than decade-long American campaign against the Qaeda affiliate in Africa.
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter .
Word count: 390
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 2, 2016"
