"The most conclusive piece of evidence against Tairod Pugh, a 48-year old U.S. Air Force veteran accused of trying to join the Islamic State, is the letter he addressed to his wife. In it, Mr. Pugh, wrote of his plan to become a martyr.
\"I will escort you into Paradise and when you see the home paid for by my blood and your tears you will know it was worth it,\" reads the letter, typed on his computer in January 2015. In it, he pledged to \"use the talents and skills given to me by Allah to establish and defend the Islamic State.\"
Days after writing those words, Mr. Pugh boarded a plane for Istanbul. Prosecutors say he was on his way to neighboring Syria to present himself to the Islamic State.
But Mr. Pugh never got that far. He was detained upon landing in Istanbul and deported to New York, where the Federal Bureau of Investigation was waiting. Last week, he became one of the first American citizens to stand trial on Islamic State-related charges.
The testimony in Federal District Court in Brooklyn has shown Mr. Pugh to be a skilled airplane mechanic and a convert to Islam who drifted across the Middle East, finding work at small airlines flying in and out of military bases on Pentagon contracts.
But Mr. Pugh's increasingly radical views had begun to alienate his co-workers and supervisors. One of his managers, Aamer Aslam, now a pilot for United Airlines, testified last week that Mr. Pugh had once claimed that the Islamic State was seeking skilled airplane mechanics. This seemed to hint at Mr. Pugh's own desire to join the Islamic State.
The January letter to his wife, Misha, however, is the clearest declaration of any intentions to join the militant group. It is the perfect piece of incriminating evidence, except for one thing: Mr. Pugh does not seem to have actually sent the letter. It appeared to be just a draft, raising the question of why he never sent it.
Did the letter explain his intentions at the time he flew to Istanbul? Did he avoid sending it because he and his wife had previously argued about jihad? His lawyers have claimed that while Mr. Pugh had dark internal fantasies about jihad, his purpose in flying to Istanbul was only to relax and search for a new job.
The draft letter perfectly captures the larger question that the jury will have to consider this week as it decides Mr. Pugh's fate: where (and how) to mark the precise moment when a man's fantasies become plans and his planning crosses over into concrete action.
It is a question that courts and juries are likely to be grappling with in similar cases in the years to come. Since 2013, the Justice Department has charged at least 85 people in cases related to foreign terrorist groups or homegrown violent extremism. Some three-quarters of these cases are connected to the Islamic State, a Justice Department spokesman, Marc Raimondi, said.
Terrorism and national security cases traditionally featured clandestine meetings of secret cells and oaths of loyalty. By contrast, the Islamic State has drawn in recruits from afar, in part by bombarding the world with propaganda and scenes of carnage, available to anyone with an Internet connection. Mr. Pugh's trial is presenting an early case study of how juries will sort through the Islamic State propaganda, online messages and travel itineraries that are likely to account for much of the evidence in such cases.
Over several days last week, the jury listened to testimony on topics ranging from Mr. Pugh's Internet searches and the propaganda he viewed (which included scenes of beheadings and crucifixions under the Islamic State), to the type of clothing Mr. Pugh packed in his backpack (\"all-terrain sandals,\" an F.B.I. agent testified about his footwear), as the prosecution made its case that Mr. Pugh was destined for Syria.
For the prosecution, by the time Mr. Pugh flew to Turkey -- a common entrance point to Syria for foreign fighters -- he had taken steps to join the Islamic State, committing a federal crime: attempting to support a foreign terrorist organization. Evidence from his computer showed that he had researched the most common border crossings between Turkey and Syria.
But defense lawyers pointed out that he was also searching websites for a new aviation job in the region after being fired from one in Kuwait. And some of his last Internet searches, on TripAdvisor, were for Turkish baths in Istanbul, a detail that is turning into the cornerstone of his defense.
At the outset of the trial, one of his lawyers, Eric M. Creizman, even claimed that Mr. Pugh went to Istanbul \"to clear his head,\" as though the heat of the bathhouses might have cleansed him of his jihadist fantasies.
As each side sought to convince jurors of what Mr. Pugh intended to do upon landing in Istanbul, the contents of his two backpacks loomed large. Some items seemed to support the prosecution's claim that Mr. Pugh was Syria-bound: a black ski mask, a small solar-powered cellphone charger and two compasses. But there were alternative interpretations as well: Istanbul was bitterly cold when Mr. Pugh landed; a solar-powered cellphone charger might be useful to an itinerant airplane mechanic; and compasses could help a Muslim in an unfamiliar city orient himself toward Mecca during prayer.
Mr. Pugh is not expected to testify, his lawyers have said. Yet the jury has caught snippets of his innermost thoughts, from his Google searches to his efforts to communicate with his wife, an Egyptian woman who spoke little English, while Mr. Pugh spoke no Arabic. Apart for long periods, they corresponded by recruiting strangers on Facebook to translate their messages between English and Arabic, a laborious process that produced as much frustration as understanding.
At one point, they apparently argued about Mr. Pugh's visions of martyrdom and she had brought up divorce, according to Facebook messages. \"I am on a mission for the pleasure of Allah,\" Mr. Pugh wrote in one message, less than four months before he left for Istanbul. \"I delayed for 2 years because of your selfish behavior. I will not allow you or anyone to get in my way.\"
Photograph
Tairod Pugh
Word count: 1065
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 7, 2016"
