"WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration on Sunday announced that it had transferred a Yemeni detainee to Italy. The United States military had held the man in indefinite wartime detention without trial at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, for 14 and a half years.
The transfer of the prisoner, Fayiz Ahmad Yahia Suleiman, reduced the detainee population to no more than 78. The move comes at a time of heightened scrutiny on detainee releases because of the disappearance of a former prisoner who had been resettled in Uruguay, which Republicans have cited in expressing opposition to further transfers.
The transfer on Sunday showed that the Obama administration, which will most likely be thwarted by Congress in its efforts to close the prison before President Obama leaves office, continues to pursue a lesser goal of getting out every detainee on a list of men recommended for transfer if security conditions are met in receiving countries.
Mr. Suleiman's departure leaves no more than 29 detainees on the list of those awaiting transfers.
He was among the earliest detainees taken by the George W. Bush administration to the wartime prison when it opened in January 2002. According to a leaked military dossier, he was arrested near the Afghan border by the Pakistani police in late 2001 and was turned over to the American military.
The dossier shows that details of Mr. Suleiman's alleged involvement with Al Qaeda were largely based on claims made to interrogators by a single detainee who was known for providing information about alleged terrorist activities by many dozens of fellow prisoners and who received favorable treatment in the prison. Intelligence officials and judges later discounted the credibility of his accuser's information absent corroboration.
Mr. Suleiman had been waiting on the transfer list since 2009, when career national security officials on a six-agency task force unanimously said he posed a low enough threat that he should be released to a stable country.
But, like many low-level Yemenis on the list, he remained stranded because the administration deemed his home country too chaotic to accept repatriated detainees.
In 2014, the administration gave up waiting for security conditions to improve in Yemen and began diplomatic efforts to find other nations willing to resettle them. Of the remaining detainees on the transfer list, 22 or so are from Yemen.
Another Yemeni on the list, Abd al Malik Abd al Wahab, was resettled to Montenegro on June 22.
Obama administration officials familiar with negotiations for Guantánamo transfers have said they believe everyone on the list will be transferred within several months. Still, the list grows from time to time as a parole-like review board periodically re-examines detainees not recommended for transfer.
Most recently, in a determination on Wednesday that was made public on Friday, the board recommended that Mohammed Rajab Sadiq Abu Ghanim, another Yemeni who was previously not on the transfer list, should be transferred to a gulf state \"with the capacity to implement robust security measures.\"
Word count: 502
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 11, 2016"
