"Explosions at an airport and a downtown metro stop during morning rush hour rocked the Belgian capital Tuesday, killing at least 34 people, wounding more than 150 and shutting down all public transportation.
Terror alerts rose across Europe, in the USA and around the world.
Belgium's federal prosecutor confirmed the two blasts at the airport and a third at the metro station were terrorist attacks. The metro station is located near buildings that house European Union institutions in central Brussels. \"We were fearing terrorist attacks, and that has now happened,\" Belgian Prime Minister Charles Michel said.
A couple with connections to Tennessee were reported missing while a former Oakland University basketball center was injured. Sebastien Bellin, who was born in Brazil, had leg surgery and was scheduled for more, OU coach Greg Kampe said.
The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks in a statement to the Amaq news agency. \"Islamic State fighters opened fire inside Zaventem Airport before several of them detonated their explosive belts,\" the statement said, adding that a \"martyrdom bomber detonated his explosive belt in the Maelbeek metro station.\"
The attack follows the arrest of Salah Abdeslam, a suspect in November's attacks in Paris who was captured in Brussels on Friday after a four-month manhunt.
A U.S. federal law enforcement official said it was likely that the assaults had been long planned but were accelerated after Abdeslam's arrest.
The official, who was not authorized to comment publicly, discounted the notion that the attacks were a form of retaliation. Rather, they might have been accelerated out of concern that Abdeslam would cooperate with Belgian investigators.
President Obama, speaking in Havana on the third day of a Latin American tour, said the United States stands with Belgium, and the attack is \"yet another reminder that the world must unite in fighting against the scourge of terrorism.\"
Hjelmgaard reported from Berlin; Reuter reported from Brussels; Bacon reported from McLean, Va. Contributing: Kevin Johnson in Washington; Belen Diego, Nikolia Apostolou and Maya Vidon in Berlin
Illustration
photo KETEVAN KARDAVA, via AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 371
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
