"One year on, a comprehensive documentary looks at the atrocities from all angles and throws up some moral quandaries. Plus, Lachlan Goudie on Scottish art, and a new year fitness regime
What would you do? The company along the corridor in your office building is coming under attack. You've seen masked men with guns arrive outside, come into the building, heard them shooting the maintenance man. Would you go across to warn your neighbours and risk meeting the killers on the way? Or would you call the police and barricade your own door?
TV writer-director Martin Boudot did the latter, and has had to live with it ever since. \"Often I ask myself: why didn't I call Charlie before calling the cops?\" he says. \"Why didn't I go and warn them when I saw the gunmen outside? If it happened again, I wouldn't wait. I'd act straight away. Sometimes I just wish I could save someone. In my dreams, I save lives, but that day I saved no one.\"
Boudot beating himself up like this is one of many numbing moments in Dan Reed's haunting documentary Three Days of Terror: The Charlie Hebdo Attacks (BBC2). You might think you knew everything there was to know about the massacre; you read about and watched it all a year ago, as it unfolded: the shootings and the subsequent manhunt for the Kouachi brothers that culminated in a showdown at a printworks in Dammartin-en-Goele, and the concurrent siege at the kosher Hyper Cacher in Porte de Vincennes in which a further four people were murdered. But you won't have seen it like this, the timeline filled in meticulously, and in such extraordinary detail.
A story such as this often requires time for the dust and the chaos to settle before it can be seen with any kind of clarity. Time -- and a load of work. Here, there are interviews with virtually everyone: survivors; police; special forces; negotiators; snipers; the shelf-stacker who escaped from the supermarket and helped the police with its layout; and people randomly caught up, such as the German tourist who bumped into the Kouachis stopping off for snacks at a petrol station (it would be comedic if it wasn't engulfed in so much bloodshed and tragedy). There is news footage, and CCTV footage, and phone footage, and Boudot's footage from the roof where he and his colleagues had gone to escape the gunmen, though not the sound of sickening percussive thuds from below as their neighbours were executed. Plus the recordings of the Kouachis and Hyper Cacher hostage-taker Amedy Coulibaly speaking -- with steely calm -- to the press.
From the carnage, the mayhem and the tears emerge stories of heartbreaking humanity and unexpected tenderness. The quiet voice of a survivor in the Charlie bloodbath to a trauma doctor: \" Monsieur, s'il vous plait, aidez moi. \" The driver, suddenly carjacked with a gun to his head, thinking to rescue his dog from the back seat of the car. The man who felt like he was coming to life, born again, after getting out of the supermarket alive. Even, at the Dammartin printworks, owner Michel Catalano bandaging the wound of his captor: not because he was forced to but because he offered; then doing it again because the injured terrorist said it was too tight. Humanity is a stubborn bugger, not so easily destroyed.
Have the more recent, more random, more bloody Paris attacks overshadowed Charlie Hebdo? Not a bit. It's just a continuation of that same timeline. The same city -- and the same ideas -- under attack, the same story. Even some of the characters are the same; just hours after Jean-Pierre Tourtier, the emergency doctor quickly on the scene at Charlie Hebdo, was interviewed for this, he was called to save lives at the Bataclan. Not just three days of terror, but a year of it, and almost certainly more.
\"I see no reason to be optimistic,\" says a security expert, chillingly. Maybe that question -- which was impossible not to ask yourself while watching -- should be not what would you do, but what will you do?
The Story of Scottish Art (BBC4)? I think I know that one: once upon a time there was a big old deer, with pointy horns, in a glen, who got painted, in oils ... No? There's more?
There are ancient gastropodous squiggles; and priapic stones, standing in proud circles like neolithic daisychains; and carved stone balls, to hold, to fondle in awe, to curl, who knows what for; and intricate Celtic crosses. That's just the first part of the story; there are three more chapters to come, and if anyone can get your Scottish art juices going, it's Lachlan Goudie. Bring on the Enlightenment.
I'm watching Trust Me I'm a Doctor (BBC2), which is looking at shaking off festive excess, while standing up. And performing little muscle toning squats, as demonstrated by Michael Mosley ... Very good, that should do it; back to the sofa for the rest of 2016.
Credit: Sam Wollaston
Word count: 856
(Copyright , Guardian Newspapers Limited, Jan 07, 2016)"
