"WASHINGTON -- Prosecutors have told an Iraqi refugee who is accused of traveling to Syria to help a terrorist organization that he faces evidence derived from the government's warrantless surveillance program, a disclosure that elevates the significance of the case by making the constitutionality of that program a central dispute.
With the rare notice this month, the case joins a small number of others in which the constitutionality of the surveillance program and its legal basis -- the FISA Amendments Act -- are at issue. Among them is an Ohio case in which three defendants accused of giving money to Al Qaeda's Yemen branch received similar notices in December.
Thomas A. Durkin, a defense lawyer who represents the Iraqi refugee, Aws Mohammed Younis Al-Jayab, who was arrested after returning to the United States, and one of the Ohio men, Yahya Farooq Mohammad, said he would ask the judges in both cases to suppress the evidence.
\"We intend to challenge it,\" Mr. Durkin said.
A Justice Department spokesman declined to comment.
The FISA Amendments Act, which revised the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, permits the government, on domestic soil and without a warrant, to intercept international emails and phone calls of noncitizens abroad, even when they communicate with Americans. For several years, prosecutors concealed from defendants when they faced evidence derived from such surveillance, preventing judicial review of the surveillance. But in the fall of 2013, after an internal debate, the Justice Department changed course and began providing notices.
At least 10 defendants in eight cases -- all terrorism-related -- have now received such a notice. They include three cases in Colorado, Oregon and Brooklyn in which defendants have challenged the surveillance and lost at the district court level; no appeals court has yet weighed in. (The defendants previously notified in three other cases did not contest the surveillance.)
Beyond the question of whether the FISA Amendments Act is constitutional in the abstract, privacy advocates also want the Supreme Court to address one of the two surveillance techniques the government employs as part of that authority.
Under the method at issue, known as the \"upstream\" technique, network providers like AT&T and Verizon apparently temporarily copy and sift all the Internet data crossing certain network switches and turn over copies of any messages that contain a \"selector\" -- like an email address -- belonging to a foreign target.
The privacy groups, including the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the American Civil Liberties Union, say that program violates the rights of the people whose unrelated message data is processed through it. While the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court has approved the program, they have been trying to persuade a regular court to scrutinize it.
Under the other method, known as the Prism system, Internet communications companies like Google or Yahoo turn over copies of the accounts of foreign users whom the government has targeted for surveillance.
The government does not tell defendants which surveillance technique it used, but it has told judges. In the Brooklyn case, the judge's declassified opinion disclosed that the defendant's message was collected via Prism, so the \"constitutionality of upstream collection is not at issue here.\"
The judges who rejected the other two challenges did not say which technique was involved.
Patrick Toomey, an A.C.L.U. lawyer, said the recent notifications provided two more opportunities for judges to see whether upstream collection was involved and, if so, to analyze it.
\"The government has repeatedly blocked the courts from considering the constitutionality of this surveillance,\" he said. \"Perhaps the provision of notice to these defendants will change that. But the millions of others affected by the government's warrantless searches must have their day in court, too.\"
Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.
Word count: 645
Copyright New York Times Company Apr 27, 2016"
