"It's a new year in Paris, and the streets seem different.
They are emptier, maybe a tad more somber than they were before Jan, 7, 2015, when a terror attack against editors of the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo kicked off a year that none of us will ever forget.
For weeks, I had been feeling the change. I began to pay more attention to the general mood in the city in the run-up to the toasts for 2016, trying to define what's different. In December, the city was adorned with fairy lights and decorations as usual. The Champs-Elysees hosted its traditional Christmas market, the Place de la Concorde its giant Ferris wheel. In shopping malls and department stores, extravagant Christmas trees stood tall.
Once again, for the festive season, \"The City of Light\" did itself honor. But it's a facade I found.
In my crowded, touristy neighborhood, the Marais, it's actually possible these days to walk or bike along the streets without bumping into anyone. There are empty seats at my neighborhood bistros. And when I take my Sunday walk, people I pass speak French. In fact, at Place des Vosges, parents call out to their children playing in the sand in French, not English, Italian, Russian or even Japanese, as it used to be.
In the stores, sales have slumped. A week before the official start of the winter sale season on Wednesday, many shops advertised \"private sales.\" In stores not doing this, I was discreetly informed by salespeople that I could \"benefit\" from a 30% \"pre-sale sale\" on all items except those from the newest collection. This is France -- the law dictates the dates of sales. Yet it seems, in the wake of terror attacks and their negative impact on our economy, discounts abound now, secret ones, in an attempt to skirt the law.
This all started a year ago, when two radical Muslim brothers shot up an editorial meeting at Charlie Hebdo, killing 11 people -- and later a police officer -- because the magazine's cartoons had poked fun at the prophet Mohammed. Another terrorist who was friends with the brothers took hostages at a Jewish grocery store and executed four.
At the time, we couldn't imagine what was to come or how it would change us.
We couldn't foresee that in 2015 soldiers standing guard to protect a Jewish community center in Nice would come under a knife attack in February, or that three Americans would thwart a gunman on a train in August. We couldn't know that coordinated terror strikes on Black Friday, Nov. 13, would leave 130 dead and a nation shattered.
We couldn't imagine that our children would be asked by their teachers to vary their routes to school for their safety, or that one of their hall monitors would be slaughtered on Nov. 13, or that interns at trauma hospitals would themselves be traumatized by seeing so many injured brought in that terrible Friday night.
As we begin a new year, we Parisians are different, full of grief over the year behind us and feeling there is little to celebrate what lies ahead.
We are entering 2016 in a changed landscape. We have new and tight security measures -- we even canceled the fireworks on the Champs-Elysees on New Year's Eve. And we look at each other differently, because we know terrorists are among us.
Recently, an acquaintance recounted to me how a man was arguing with another man on the Metro at rush hour and was clearly doing so because the other man looked to be a Muslim. The argument went on and the tone became aggressive. Finally, a tiny woman stood up and said: \"It's enough, stop this now!\"
I wish we could.
Vidon is a Paris-based reporter and photographer with Associated Reporters Abroad.
Illustration
photo Joel Saget, AFP/Getty Images
Word count: 675
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
