"President Obama gave an optimistic assessment of the campaign against terror across North Africa and the Middle East on Tuesday, thanking U.S. troops for their help in \"breaking the back\" of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.
In his last major foreign policy address of his presidency, Obama urged Americans to \"put the terrorist threat in perspective\" and reject torture, unlimited detention and heightened scrutiny of Muslim Americans -- hallmarks of President-elect Donald Trump's counterterrorism policies.
\"The terrorist threat is real, and it is dangerous,\" Obama told a crowd that included special operations troops at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa. Unlike fascism and communism, today's extremists do not threaten the world order. \"They are thugs and they are murderers, and they should be treated that way.\"
Noting that he will be the first president to serve two full terms in a state of war, Obama laid out a defense of his military strategy. It was a doctrine that avoided large-scale military deployments in favor of more targeted actions to support foreign troops fighting terrorists. \"It demonstrates a shift in how we have taken the fight against terrorists everywhere,\" Obama said. \"Instead of trying to mount invasions wherever terrorists appear, we've built a network of partners.\"
Though Obama touted the withdrawal of 180,000 troops from Iraq and Afghanistan since taking office, a report he sent to Congress on Monday shows he was unable to completely withdraw U.S. troops from Africa and the Middle East. The unclassified version of his semiannual war powers letter outlined 19,996 combat troops he authorized in hot spots from Afghanistan to Cameroon to Kosovo -- 1,579 more than six months ago. There are 1,352 troops scheduled to depart Afghanistan by Jan. 1.
Obama did not mention his successor by name, but his speech provided a clear contrast with Trump's more bellicose approach to fighting terrorism.
\"Staying true to our traditions as a nation of laws advances our security as well as our values,\" he said. He argued that the United States should continue to ban the use of torture, close the military detention facility at Guantanamo Bay and \"deal with suspected terrorists through our justice system.\"
Obama couldn't make good on his promise to close Guantanamo Bay because of congressional restrictions on transferring detainees to U.S. soil.
After transferring scores of detainees to other countries -- including one to Cape Verde on Sunday -- the facility holds 59 suspected terrorists captured during the early days of the war on terror.
\"Until Congress changes course, it will continue to be judged harshly by history,\" he said, calling the facility \"a blot on our national honor.\"
Credit: Gregory Korte, @gregorykorte, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo Chris Urso, AP
Word count: 479
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
