"U.S. military commanders are drawing up plans to block Islamic State militants from using human shields to escape Mosul and other cities, as U.S.-backed ground forces prepare to expel them from their remaining strongholds in Iraq and Syria.
\"I think we need to be prepared for them to try to find ways to get out,\" Air Force Lt. Gen. Jeffrey L. Harrigian, commander in the Middle East, said in an interview at the air campaign's headquarters here.
U.S. commanders have been frustrated by tactics the militants have used to avoid annihilation -- fleeing just as their defenses are about to collapse, a central part of the militants' game plan.
Last month, hundreds of fighters escaped Manbij in northern Syria by placing civilians in a convoy of 500 vehicles. Hundreds of militants were killed but several hundred escaped with weapons. The Pentagon said it didn't fire on the convoy for fear of hitting civilians.
Military planners said they will design surveillance and other intelligence to determine when militants will quit fighting and try to escape. That might allow U.S. aircraft to strike militants before they can grab civilians.
For example, they are watching for militant commanders to order their fighters to flee, which might allow for pre-emptive strikes.
\"They are going to know when (Iraq's military) is getting closer and then it will be: Are they going to get told to stand and fight or are they going to look for ways out,\" Harrigian said.
Islamic State tactics have followed a similar pattern -- the militants inflict as many casualties as they can before they flee advances by U.S.-backed Iraqi or Syrian opposition forces.
The 2015 battle to retake Ramadi lasted months and fighters filtered out of the city over time, as Iraqi forces closed in on them.
The recent battle for Fallujah went more quickly, catching the militants unprepared. They were hammered by coalition airstrikes after drones determined there were no civilians accompanying them. Airstrikes in late June killed at least 348 militants and destroyed 200 vehicles in one of the biggest routs of the militants, according to Pentagon figures.
In the Syrian city of Manbij, militants negotiated with opposition forces before leaving with hundreds of civilians.
Mosul, Iraq's second largest city, is far more complex.
About 6,000 militants are defending the city, where hundreds of thousands of civilians remain.
Iraqi forces typically surround a city, leaving a corridor for civilians to flee. Iraq's military is developing plans to screen civilians as they leave to catch any militants escaping among the crowds.
\"If you want to kill and capture the enemy, encirclement is the best option,\" said Michael Knights of Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
Credit: Jim Michaels, @jimmichaels, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo AP
Word count: 489
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
