"MADRID -- A terrorist to some, an independence leader to others, Arnaldo Otegi has been in and out of Spanish courts and prisons for three decades for his links to ETA, the separatist group that has led a violent campaign for an independent Basque homeland.
His last conviction -- for trying to rebuild an outlawed party that was ETA's political arm -- made him something of a cause célèbre. Nobel Peace Prize winners like Adolfo Pérez Esquivel and Desmond Tutu lobbied for his freedom.
On Tuesday, Mr. Otegi, 57, will be released, after Spain's Supreme Court reduced a 10-year sentence that was strongly criticized by international lawyers and human rights activists to six and half years.
The prospect of his freedom -- and what it might mean for the Basque cause -- is already raising alarm in Spain at a time of deep paralysis in national politics and a serious separatist challenge from the larger region of Catalonia.
For Madrid, Mr. Otegi presents another potential threat to the integrity of Spain. As a Basque leader of long standing, he may possess the clout and credibility to help secure the final dismantling of ETA, many in his region hope, in favor of a reinvigorated democratic fight for Basque secession.
Even before his release, the Spanish government is taking legal steps to check public gatherings planned for Mr. Otegi, including a mass demonstration in a stadium in San Sebastián. Government officials have warned that Spain's judiciary will forcefully apply a law that forbids any citizen to glorify terrorism.
Still, in response to written questions, Mr. Otegi made it clear that his time in prison did nothing to dim his commitment to an independent Basque nation.
He aims to become the next leader of the Basque region, he said in a written statement from prison, and will run in March for internal elections to select candidates for EH Bildu, a coalition party seeking Basque separation.
\"Sooner rather than later we will use the right to self-determination and thus transform ourselves into a new state of Europe,\" he said.
Born in the industrial Basque town of Elgoibar in a Socialist family, Mr. Otegi joined ETA in the 1970s, when Spain was transitioning to democracy after the Franco dictatorship.
After the Spanish police established that he was involved in one of ETA's commando units, Mr. Otegi escaped to France in 1977. He was eventually arrested and sent back to Spain to stand trial for the kidnapping in 1979 of the director of a Basque factory of Michelin, the tire company.
Upon completing his prison sentence for the kidnapping, Mr. Otegi switched to politics and won a seat in the regional Basque Parliament in 1995. He eventually took over as one of the leaders and the main spokesman of Herri Batasuna, the separatist party most closely linked to ETA.
The party was outlawed in 2003, and Mr. Otegi's final sentence was for trying to restart it.
Mr. Otegi was one of the main protagonists in an unsuccessful round of peace negotiations between the Spanish government and ETA that ended in 2007, after ETA killed two people with a bomb at the Madrid airport.
ETA declared a unilateral cease-fire, in 2011, but it has yet to unconditionally hand over its weapons, as demanded by the conservative government of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy in Madrid.
In his written statement from prison, Mr. Otegi suggested that the government had not made a genuine attempt to dismantle ETA, but that it preferred instead to keep ETA alive as a convenient foil to check the political ambitions of Basque separatists.
Still, the region's current leader, Iñigo Urkullu from the Basque Nationalist Party, has been treading a far more cautious line, monitoring the standoff in Catalonia but opposing the idea of any unilateral declaration of independence, as the Catalans have been threatening to do.
In any case, the hard-line Basque separatists faired poorly in the last national elections in December, and were eclipsed by Podemos, an upstart left-wing party that gained the most votes in the region.
\"I think the Basque separatists were caught wrong-footed and misjudged voters, because they kept talking just about politics when the middle and lower classes were worrying more about growing inequality and the kind of economic issues raised by Podemos,\" said Francisco de Borja Lasheras, a Basque political analyst.
As a result, he added, even if Mr. Otegi remains a divisive figure, \"it is a sign of the normalization of the Basque situation that his release will not cause the kind of shock for most Spaniards that it would have done 10 years ago.\"
Basque separatist politicians say Mr. Otegi's return will help their movement. They also contend that Catalonia's push toward secession will eventually have wide repercussions.
\"Whenever the Catalan process accelerates, it creates hope in the Basque Country,\" said Jon Iñarritu, a separatist politician and former member of the Spanish Parliament.
Mr. Otegi's political return \"will play a key role, and he brings both charisma and motivation,\" Mr. Iñarritu added. \"I think there will be a general feeling of joy at his release.\"
That feeling will not be shared by all. \"There are people whom I would want to leave forever in prison, but I have to accept what our justice system says once a sentence has been completed,\" said Ángeles Pedraza, the president of the Association of Victims of Terrorism, which was founded in 1981, at a time of bombings and killings by ETA.
Word count: 922
Copyright New York Times Company Mar 1, 2016"
