"DAKAR, Senegal -- Samba Faye's training for Sunday's inaugural marathon here includes runs along Dakar's scenic coastal road, where there has been a noticeable increase in armed security at upscale hotels and shopping areas after recent terrorist attacks in Burkina Faso and Mali.
But Faye's concerns are his pace and hydration. He says he is not sweating security.
\"There won't be any problems,\" said Faye, 29, one of Senegal's best distance runners, who, like his fellow Muslims, sprinkles hopeful statements with the Arabic term \"inshallah,\" meaning \"God willing.\" \"The authorities will take the necessary measures.\"
Senegal's first official marathon, named the Marathon Eiffage de l'Autoroute de Dakar, will be run on Sunday, a month after attackers killed 30 people at a hotel and cafe in Ouagadougou, the capital of Burkina Faso, and three months after at least 19 people were killed in a Nov. 20 hotel siege in Bamako, the capital of neighboring Mali. Islamist militants claimed responsibility in both attacks.
Marathons worldwide have been on alert after the deadly Boston Marathon bombing in 2013, but the particular challenges of managing and securing a 26.2-mile course in the region are substantial.
Even though Senegal, with an overwhelmingly Muslim population, enjoys political stability, heavily armed police have been flagging down motorists and searching vehicles in the capital city. One headline described the country as \"afraid\" of a similar assault.
Yet even with all the challenges in West Africa, which in addition to safety include, most notably, poverty and unemployment, the region appears ready to join the global running craze. Marathons are popping up all over, as organizers dream of gaining international prestige and inspiring a new generation of distance runners.
The Lagos City Marathon, billed as Nigeria's first in 30 years, attracted more than 20,000 runners last Saturday to the streets of one of Africa's largest cities, with no security problems reported. A new marathon was held last fall in Ivory Coast, and Gabon, farther south, hosted its third annual marathon in November.
\"Africa is following the global trend,\" said Sébastien Bottari, managing director of Everest Media, the Swiss-based company that organizes and markets the Marathon of Gabon. \"It's spreading more and more every day. It doesn't cost much. It doesn't require tons of infrastructure.\"
There are smaller-scale marathons as well. A race in Sierra Leone is in its fifth year and raises funds for the British charity Street Child. A Liberian half-marathon celebrated resilience in the wake of an Ebola epidemic. The Accra International Marathon in Ghana annually draws several hundred runners.
But security remains a concern. In Lagos, plainclothes police officers worked the crowds last weekend, and the start and finish lines were heavily protected, according to a marathon spokesman, Olukayode Thomas. Boko Haram, the militant group that allied itself with the Islamic State, is active mostly in northeastern Nigeria, not Lagos, though the city has serious crime problems.
For the Gabon race, marathon organizers imported bomb-sniffing dogs from Paris, Mr. Bottari said. \"We took it very seriously,\" he said. \"The government took it very seriously.\"
Race locations present different challenges. Nigerians complained about street closings in Lagos, though most runners could simply walk to the start. In Senegal, shuttle buses will bring competitors and spectators from Dakar to the course, about 15 miles away.
Joggers love Dakar's oceanside road, called the Corniche, and Mr. Bottari said that he hoped to organize a marathon along it in the future. But for this year, the race will be held on an inland toll-highway extension not yet open to vehicles. The event is being organized by Eiffage Senegal, a French construction company that built the highway as part of a public-private partnership.
The current toll road, operated by Eiffage, links Dakar to a new conference center and is considered vital to Senegal's economic development. The 10-mile extension will provide access to a new international airport that is still under construction.
More than 10,000 participants are expected for this weekend's events, which include fun runs, a 10-kilometer race and a half-marathon. The marathon has been a harder sell. Fewer than 500 athletes had registered by Monday, according to the running club Les Caïmans de Dakar, which is helping Eiffage with logistics. Late registrations were still being counted and processed.
Many Senegalese, especially women, prefer shorter races, at least for now.
\"I'm not ready to do it; maybe in two or three years,\" said Aïcha Dabo, 26, a communications specialist who was among the 1,535 people registered for the 10K.
The Marathon Eiffage de l'Autoroute de Dakar is believed to be Senegal's first marathon, with the 26.2-mile course certified by international organizations. A contingent of Kenyans and Ethiopians was scheduled to compete, though the marathon is unlikely to attract elite runners, since the male and female winners each will receive about $7,600. Eiffage has not committed to hosting the race beyond this year.
Veterans of bucket-list marathons like Paris or London will not be impressed by the scenery. The course cuts through a dry savanna containing no street life, and approaches woods -- since deteriorated because of illegal harvesting -- that French colonial rulers once eyed for a hunting reserve.
\"It's pretty barren,\" said Daniella van Leggelo-Padilla, a 30-year-old American who runs with the Caïmans. \"The fact that it's very wide, because it's a highway, is very unusual for a marathon. That is challenging mentally because you just don't feel like you're advancing, because the horizon stays the same.\"
Eiffage is positioning Senegalese artists and musicians along the course, and vans will be available to ferry spectators to different points along the route.
\"It's a challenge,\" said Michel Theron, a 58-year-old French businessman who serves as the president of Caïmans. He has completed 22 marathons and will oversee the hydration stations this weekend. \"We are marathoners. You live in Senegal and somebody will ask you, 'Did you run the marathon of Dakar?' You say no? It's not possible. We have to run.\"
From a security perspective, the nontraditional route has advantages. Since there is currently no public access, spectators must funnel through a checkpoint at the conference center to get to the course.
Gérard Senac, a managing director of Eiffage Senegal, said he had been working closely with Senegal's security forces, which already provide protection for the construction project. In a recent news conference, he said he was confident that the authorities would augment security if needed.
Even with a 7:30 a.m. start, the temperature outside Dakar on Sunday is expected to be in the low 70s, topping 80 by late morning.
\"It's hot; it's dusty,\" Ms. van Leggelo-Padilla said. \"It's going to be a challenging marathon.\"
Photograph
Registered Runners Making Final Efforts to Get Their Race Kits Before Last Saturday's Marathon in Lagos, Nigeria. Concerns About Terrorism Plague Such Events in the Region. (Photograph by Andrew Esiebo for the New York Times) (B9); More Than 20,000 Runners Competed in the Lagos City Marathon, Above, On Saturday. Registered Participants, Left, Examined the Route in Advance. Another Marathon Will Be Held Sunday in Dakar, Senegal. The Marathon Circuit in Africa has Expanded in Recent Years to Countries Including Ghana, Gabon and Ivory Coast, Despite Fears Over the Potential for Terrorist Attacks. (Photographs by Stefan Heunis/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images; Andrew Esiebo for the New York Times) (B10)
Word count: 1233
Copyright New York Times Company Feb 11, 2016"
