"The Pentagon tracks every Islamic State fighter it kills and reports the body count regularly to the highest levels, but refuses to discuss the toll publicly, USA TODAY has learned.
A senior Defense official said last week that the total of 50,000 militants killed since the U.S.-led air war began in 2014 is likely a conservative estimate. Killing large numbers of enemy combatants affects their ability to fight and hold territory, said the official who, as with other Defense officials interviewed, spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly about the body counts.
Officials at the Pentagon and Central Command, which oversees combat against the group also known as ISIL, had agreed in November to release more detail on enemy killed-in-action figures and how they are tabulated to USA TODAY. But those officials backed out of the agreement. The numbers are not classified, but military officials refuse to talk about them, or to explain why.
Officials at Central Command and at the Pentagon have received regular, sometimes weekly, updates of the number of ISIL fighters killed in U.S.-led attacks, a senior officer said.
The Pentagon's refusal stems from its longstanding credo, echoed by top commanders including retired general David Petraeus that it's impossible \"to kill or capture our way out\" of counterinsurgencies in Iraq and Afghanistan. Their reticence also has roots in Vietnam when daily news briefings in Saigon, derided as the \"5 O'Clock Follies,\" boasted body counts to show the war was being won, according to a second senior official familiar with the reports and military analysts.
\"People see such numbers as harkening back to Vietnam when we misdiagnosed progress based on body counts,\" said Michael O'Hanlon, a military analyst at the Brookings Institution. The counts \"effectively turned field commanders into leaders incentivized to kill more in order to prove their merits.\"
Another reason for the reticence: The killing only keeps pace with Islamic State recruiting. Despite 50,000 or more Islamic State fighters, the militants continue to field a force between 20,000 and 30,000, said the senior officer.
Scott Murray, a retired Air Force colonel who helped lead efforts to develop ISIL targets, said counting the dead has been largely discredited as a tool to evaluate progress in war.
\"It's that simple,\" Murray said. \"Body counts are part of the narrative of how to lose a war.\"
But privately -- and on rare occasion in public -- senior battlefield commanders acknowledge that killing and counting Islamic State dead matters.
Army Lt. Gen. Sean MacFarland, who led the allied war effort until this summer, tracked the number of enemy killed as one measure of progress. He told reporters at his last briefing in August that 25,000 ISIL fighters had been killed in the previous 11 months, an increase in the pace of lethal attacks.
\"The numbers are a best estimate -- not exact, although the team tries hard to get it right,\" MacFarland said in an email. \"The best proof of their basic accuracy is the increasing momentum of the campaign.\"
The Pentagon has deployed a dizzying array of spy planes and other technology to the Middle East to track enemy combatants, develop plans to attack targets and to assess what's been blown up and who has been killed.
Reaper and Predator drones loiter relentlessly in the skies over Iraq and Syria, providing video footage for commanders. Imagery also streams in from other warplanes tracking their bombs, missiles and rounds of ammunition from their cannons.
Central Command and the Pentagon are quick to claim credit for equipment and materiel destroyed in airstrikes.
Yet neither Central Command nor the military headquarters in Iraq responded to a query about whether truck drivers are considered fighters, and if any were killed in the airstrikes.
Virtually every attack against ISIL is documented by video cameras or infrared devices, the second official said.
The British military is more forthcoming about the human toll of its attacks. It estimates that British warplanes have killed or wounded 1,915 ISIL fighters from Sept. 2014 to Nov. 2016, according to Ministry of Defence figures.
Commanders look at several measures to gauge progress against ISIL. Defense Secretary Ash Carter told allies in Bahrain on Saturday that targeted attacks have decimated ISIL's leadership.
But the volume of enemy dead is still a key metric, the second official said. Top commanders n are briefed on the results of attacks by U.S. and allied warplanes on Islamic State targets.
Credit: Tom Vanden Brook, @tvandenbrook, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo AP file photo
Word count: 792
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
