"JERUSALEM -- The Israeli soldier who fatally shot a wounded Palestinian attacker in March testified at his trial on Sunday that he fired because he saw a \"real and immediate danger\" and that others in the area had shouted that the Palestinian might be concealing a bomb.
The soldier, Sgt. Elor Azaria, also fiercely criticized his company commander, Maj. Tom Naaman, who testified last month that the wounded Palestinian had posed no further danger after an attack in the West Bank city of Hebron. The commander, Sergeant Azaria said, was standing near the Palestinian and speaking on a radio, paying no attention as bystanders -- exactly which ones the sergeant could not recall -- warned of a possible bomb.
After shooting the Palestinian once in the head, Sergeant Azaria said, he was berated by Major Naaman. The commander shouted, \"Are you crazy?\" Sergeant Azaria testified, according to Israeli radio, and then slapped him.
It was the first time Sergeant Azaria claimed that Major Naaman had hit him, and the prosecutor immediately questioned why Sergeant Azaria's previous written testimony did not include that detail.
The prosecutor, Nadav Weisman, said he would press Sergeant Azaria on the issue during cross-examination, which was scheduled to begin by Monday.
Sergeant Azaria, a medic, said that just before he shot the Palestinian, he had been under great stress as he furiously tried to stanch the flow of blood from a stab wound of one of the victims of an attack: another soldier who bunked near him.
\"I pressed down on the wound with my hands,\" Sergeant Azaria said, according to Ynet. \"He was bleeding really heavily. It was the first real injury I treated.\"
He said that was when he heard shouts that the Palestinian, Abdel Fattah al-Sharif, might be carrying a bomb. Sergeant Azaria said he then recalled that soldiers had been warned that a major terrorist attack could be on the way.
Ilan Katz, Sergeant Azaria's defense lawyer, said on Israel Radio: \"Today, for the first time since Elor's trial began, his version was heard in a formal interrogation, without disturbance and without analysis. The soldier points to the real and immediate danger he saw.\"
Sergeant Azaria, who is accused of manslaughter in the shooting on March 24, is being tried in a military court in Jaffa. He has pleaded not guilty.
Before the shooting, Mr. Sharif and another Palestinian stabbed the soldier, inflicting what were previously described as light wounds at a checkpoint in Hebron. Other soldiers opened fire, wounding Mr. Sharif and killing the other Palestinian about six minutes before Sergeant Azaria arrived.
An anguished national debate over the shooting was probably a factor in the resignation of Defense Minister Moshe Yaalon in May. In his testimony, Sergeant Azaria had some harsh words for his commanders, who he said had betrayed him after the shooting, and Mr. Yaalon, whom Sergeant Azaria accused of making up his mind about the case before learning the details.
Major Naaman told the court on June 16 that Mr. Sharif had posed no danger to anyone in the moments before Sergeant Azaria shot him. The major said he had asked the sergeant who had given the authorization to shoot Mr. Sharif. He said the sergeant had replied: \"The terrorist was alive. He has to die.\" Major Naaman made no reference to striking Sergeant Azaria.
The Israel Defense Forces declined to comment on Sergeant Azaria's accusation against Major Naaman. \"The I.D.F. won't be commenting on any of the proceedings of the case,\" a spokeswoman said.
Credit: JAMES GLANZ; Myra Noveck contributed reporting.
Word count: 606
Copyright New York Times Company Jul 25, 2016"
