"When Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan comes to Washington this week, he'll open an Islamic cultural center in Lanham, Md., attend the 2016 Nuclear Security Summit and meet with Vice President Biden.
One thing he likely won't do is have a formal meeting with President Obama. White House press secretary Josh Earnest told reporters Tuesday that Erdogan and Obama are expected to meet informally and \"at least have a conversation.\" They won't meet because more than 50 world leaders are in town and Obama's time is limited, Earnest said.
But analysts detect a snub reflecting U.S. discomfort with Erdogan's crackdown on free expression in Turkish news media and political opponents.
On security matters, however, Erdogan and Obama are closer. Turkey supports a U.S.-led coalition fighting the Islamic State and backs Obama's call for new leadership in Syria to end the five-year civil war.
Erdogan was to arrive Tuesday and hopes to meet with Obama during his visit, said Fatih Oke, spokesman for the Turkish Embassy in Washington. Earnest said Monday that Obama and Erdogan met several times in recent months, including at the Paris climate summit in November, and both leaders will attend the nuclear security summit Thursday and Friday.
Erdogan, who has pushed his majority Muslim nation away from its traditionally secular culture to a more religious one, has been severely critical of the West. After the Paris terrorist attacks in November, Erdogan called European leaders hypocrites for not taking a stronger stand against anti-Muslim hate speech and attacks on mosques.
\"He believes the Western world is decadent and immoral,\" said Aykan Erdemir, a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies.
Erdogan's visit comes weeks after Turkish officials seized the country's largest newspaper, Zaman, which authorities accused of being a mouthpiece for Fethullah Gullen, a former political ally who it now accuses of trying to overthrow the government. The newspaper's staff was replaced and its content turned overnight from critical of the Erdogan government to complimentary.
State Department spokesman John Kirby described the seizure as \"troubling,\" and said it was just the latest in a string of seizures of media companies and charges filed against journalists accused of insulting the Turkish leader.
Credit: Oren Dorell, USA TODAY
Illustration
photo AP
Word count: 401
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
