"A week after the worst mass shooting in the nation's modern history, the stampede is on to do something, almost anything, to prevent a repeat of the carnage in Orlando. That instinct is a worthy one, and the Senate is expected to vote Monday on several measures to rein in gun sales.
The question is whether bitterly divided lawmakers can agree on anything and, if so, whether they will do something that makes people safer or just makes them feel safer.
Democrats, led by Sen. Dianne Feinstein of California, are pushing to give the attorney general authority to bar gun sales to suspected terrorists, under many of the same criteria used to put people on the nation's no-fly and other broad terrorism watchlists. \"If you're too dangerous to get on a plane,\" presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton said last week, \"you're too dangerous to buy a gun.\"
That's a good sound bite, but the issue is hardly so simple. The most serious complication is a little thing called the Constitution. Like it or not, the Supreme Court has ruled that buying and owning a gun is a constitutional right, though not an unlimited one.
Even so, more can be done without running afoul of the Second Amendment. First is ensuring that the FBI knows when a suspected terrorist is trying to buy a weapon, which could suggest terrorist aspirations are turning into a real plot.
When the FBI closed its earlier investigations of Orlando nightclub killer Omar Mateen, he was dropped from terrorism watchlists -- so the FBI was not alerted when he recently purchased the semiautomatic assault weapon he used on June 12. Alerting, or \"pinging,\" the FBI to gun purchases by anyone on the list in the previous five years is essential. The Senate ought to be able to find a compromise among various proposals to give the FBI reasonable time to investigate the buyer and demonstrate in court the need to block a sale.
Beyond the watchlist issues are two steps that should have been enacted long ago. One is broadening background checks to include private sales at gun shows. The second is to ban the sale of semiautomatic assault-style weapons and high-capacity magazines -- the favored instruments of mass carnage in several recent mass killings -- to suspected terrorists and everyone else.
Shamefully, because of opposition from the gun lobby, both of these commonsense steps have been defeated in the past, even after 20 first-graders were slaughtered in Newtown, Conn.
Congress could also usefully mandate a review of FBI decision-making processes. Orlando is the third time since 2009 that the FBI had a potential terrorist on its radar, only to let him slip away and later carry out a massacre. The first was an Army psychiatrist who killed 13 at Fort Hood, Texas. Then in 2011, the FBI investigated a Russian tip on one of the brothers who'd later carry out the Boston Marathon bombings. The FBI can't be right 100% of the time; nor can it afford to repeat fatal errors.
Congress once again faces the what-ifs and might-have-beens that follow every mass slaying. If it again lets deep political divisions stand in the way of change, it will be unforgivable.
Illustration
photo David Goldman, AP
Word count: 571
(Copyright (c) 2016 USA Today. All Rights Reserved.)"
